2021Œ2022 Caltech Catalog California Institute of Technology Pasadena, California 91125 (626) 395-6811September 2021The mission of the California Institute of Technology is to expand  human knowledge and benefit society through research integrated with  education. We investigate the most challenging, fundamental problems  in science and technology in a singularly collegial, interdisciplinary  atmosphere, while educating outstanding students to become creative  members of society. While every effort has been made to ensure this catalog is accurate and up to date when pub -lished, changes affecting the content of the catalog may occur during the year. Accordingly, the  Institute reserves the right to correct or change its policies, rules, regulations, requirements for  graduation, course offerings, and any other contents of this catalog at any time, including, but  not limited to, admission, registration, tuition and fees, attendance, curriculum and curriculum  delivery and requirements, conduct, and academic standing. Current versions of Institute poli -cies can be accessed at hr.caltech.edu/services/policies. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on Caltech, the Institute must maintain the flexibility to adapt programs, policies, and on-campus operations for the 2021-22 academic  year to meet the needs of the community. For the most up-to-date information on the Institute™s  response to the global health crisis, visit together.caltech.edu. You can view the Caltech Catalog online at catalog.caltech.edu. Please note that the contents  of websites that link to online course entries are not part of the official catalog.   Updated on December 23, 2021Cover: Dwayne Miles2ContentsCONTENTS 1. GENERAL INFORMATION 9  Introduction 9  Mission9   Historical Sketch10   Education and Research 15   Educational Philosophy &  Learning Outcomes 15   Jet Propulsion Laboratory 16   Student Life24   Student Wellness       Services26   Caltech Accessibility       Services for Students26   Caltech CARE Team 27   Careers Advising &       Experiential Learning 29   Caltech Alumni    Association29   International Student    Programs 29   Auditing Courses30   Grades and Grading34   Notices and Agreements 44   Code of Conduct46   Institute Policies129 Student Affairs Policies 2. AREAS OF STUDYAND RESEARCH131 Aerospace 135 Applied and       Computational      Mathematics136 Applied Mechanics137 Applied Physics138 Astrophysics 141 Biochemistry and      Molecular Biophysics 142 Bioengineering143 Biology144 Chemical Engineering146 Chemistry148 Civil Engineering149 Computation and Neural    Systems150 Computer Science152 Computing and      Mathematical Sciences  153 Control and Dynamical    Systems153 Electrical Engineering158 Energy Science and     Technology 158 Environmental Science    and Engineering  162 Geological and Planetary  Sciences164 History and Philosophy   of Science 164 Humanities165 Information and Data  Sciences166 Information Science and   Technology 166 Interdisciplinary Studies    Program 167 Materials Science168 Mathematics169 Mechanical Engineering170 Medical Engineering171 Microbiology 172 Neurobiology 172 Physics175 Science and Engineering    Communications176 Social and Decision  Neuroscience 176 Social Science181 Systems Biology3. INFORMATION FOR  UNDERGRADUATE  STUDENTS183 Admission to the    Freshman Class 186 Admission to Upper     Classes by Transfer 190 Study Away 191 Study Abroad  197 ROTC198 Registration Regulations205 Scholastic Requirements 209 Undergraduate Expenses 214 Financial Aid230 Prizes and Awards 239 Graduation      Requirements, All  Options3Contents4. INFORMATION FOR  GRADUATE STUDENTS 329 Graduate Policies and   Procedures 344 General Requirements for   Graduate Degrees 351 Graduate Expenses354 Financial Assistance356 Prizes and Awards 363 Special Regulations of   Graduate Options 5. COURSES457 General Information458 Aerospace 467 Anthropology 468 Applied and    Computational    Mathematics475 Applied Mechanics477 Applied Physics484 Art History484 Astrophysics 491 Biochemistry and    Molecular Biophysics 492 Bioengineering499 Biology512 Business, Economics,  and Management 515 Chemical Engineering522 Chemistry532 Civil Engineering535 Computation and Neural  Systems540 Computer Science554 Computing and  Mathematical Sciences 556 Control and Dynamical    Systems559 Economics563 Electrical Engineering577 Energy Science and     Technology 577 Engineering (General)579 English595 English as a Second    Language595 Environmental Science    and Engineering  602 Film602 Freshman Seminars 605 Geological and Planetary  Sciences623 History633 History and Philosophy   of Science 641 Humanities655 Information and Data  Sciences659 Information Science and  Technology 659 Interdisciplinary Studies    Program 659  Languages659  Law665  Materials Science669  Mathematics678  Mechanical Engineering687 Medical Engineering690  Music692 Neurobiology 695  Performing and  Visual Arts 697  Philosophy700  Physical Education706  Physics716  Political Science719  Psychology 723  Scientific and Engineering   Communications725  Social Science729 Student Activities730  Visual Culture 736  Writing 6. TRUSTEES, ADMINISTRATION,  AND FACULTY 739 Officers  739 Board of Trustees 744  Administrative Officers 746  Faculty Officers and   Committees749  Staff of Instruction and    Research 788 Officers and Faculty 842 Index4Academic Calendar*First due date for final examinationsACADEMIC  CALENDAR2021-2022First Term 2021 September 16Œ18   International student orientation September (see website for dates) New student check-in and orientation for  undergraduatesSeptember 20-24 New student check-in and orientation for  graduate studentsSeptember 23 Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors CommitteeŠ1 p.m.September 27 Beginning of instructionŠ8 a.m.October 15 Last day for adding courses and removing  conditions & incompletesOctober 27ŒNovember 2 Midterm examination periodNovember 8 Midterm deficiency notices dueŠ9 a.m.November 17 Faculty meetingŠnoon to 1 p.m.November 17 Last day for dropping courses, exercising  pass/fail option, and changing sectionsNovember 18ŒDecember 3 Registration for second term, 2021-22November 25Œ26 Thanksgiving (Institute holiday)December 3 Ł Last day of classes Ł Last day to register for second term,  2021Œ22 without a $50 late feeDecember 4-7 Study periodDecember 8*Œ 10 Final examinations, first term, 2021Œ22December 10 End of first term, 2021Œ22December 11ŒJanuary 2  Winter recess December 15 Instructors™ final grade reports dueŠ9  a.m.December 23, 27Œ30 Special release days and floating holidays December 24 Christmas observed (Institute holiday)December 31 New Year™s Day observed (Institute hol -iday)Second Term 2022 January 3  Beginning of instructionŠ8 a.m.January 4  Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors CommitteeŠ9 a.m.January 17  Martin Luther King Day (Institute holiday)January 21  Last day for adding courses and removing  conditions & incompletesFebruary 2Œ8  Midterm examination periodFebruary 14  Midterm deficiency notices dueŠ9 a.m.February 21  Presidents™ Day (Institute holiday) February 23  Last day for dropping courses, exercising  pass/fail option, and changing sectionsFebruary 23  Faculty meetingŠnoon to 1 p.m.February 24ŒMarch 9  Registration for third term, 2021-22 March 9 Ł Last day of classes Ł Last day to register for third term,  2021Œ22, without a $50 late feeMarch10-13 Study periodMarch 14*Œ16 Final examinations, second term, 2021-22March 16 End of second term, 2021-22March 17Œ25 Spring recess 5Academic Calendar*First due date for final examinationsMarch 21 Instructors™ final grades dueŠ9 a.m.Third Term 2022 March 28 Beginning of instructionŠ8 a.m.March 29 Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors CommitteeŠ9 a.m.April 15 Last day for adding courses and removing  conditions and incompletesApril 27ŒMay 3 Midterm examination periodMay 9 Ł Midterm deficiency notices dueŠ9 a.m. Ł Last day for seniors to remove condi -tions and incompletesMay 13 Last day for admission to candidacy for  the degrees of Master of Science and  Engineer, and for scheduling an examina -tion for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy May 18 Last day for dropping courses, exercising  pass/fail option, and changing sectionsMay 19-June 3 Registration for first term, 2022Œ23, and  for summer research May 27 Ł Last day of classesŠseniors and grad-uate students   Ł Last day for presenting theses for the  degrees of Doctor of Philosophy and  EngineerMay 30 Memorial Day (Institute holiday)May 28Œ31 Study period for seniors and graduate  studentsJune 1*Œ3 Final examinations for seniors and gradu-ate students, third term, 2021Œ22 June 3 Ł Last day of classesŠundergraduates Ł Last day to register for first term, 2022Œ 23, without a $50 late feeJune 4Œ7 Study period for undergraduatesJune 6 Instructors™ final grade reports due for  seniors and graduate studentsŠ9 a.mJune 8 Curriculum CommitteeŠ10 a.m. Faculty meetingŠ1 p.m.- 2 p.m.June 8*Œ10 Final examinations for undergraduates,  third term, 2021-22 June 10 CommencementŠ10 a.m. End of third  term, 2021Œ22June 15 Instructors™ final grades due for under-graduatesŠ9 a.m.June 22 Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors CommitteeŠ9 a.m.July 4 Independence Day (Institute holiday)Summer Term 2022 June 13 Summer Term begins June 20 Juneteenth (observed) (Institute holiday)July 1 & 4   Floating holiday and Independence Day  (Institute holidays)September 2 Summer Term ends September 5 Labor Day (Institute holiday)First Term 2022-2023 September 15Œ17 International student orientation September 18-25 New student check-in and orientation for  undergraduatesSeptember 19-23 New student check-in and orientation for  graduate studentsSeptember 22 Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors CommitteeŠ1 p.m.September 27 Beginning of instructionŠ8 a.m.Campus MapCampus Directory Caltech Campus Building Directory 255 S Hill Ave (Office of Residential Experience) 390E1Dabney Hall 40D4263 S Chester (International Scholar Services) 11D1Dabney House 58D4275 S Hill (Theater Arts (TACIT)) 67E1Downs-Lauritsen Laboratories 47C4287 S Hill (Rickenbaugh House) 98E1Facilities Building 83D3295 S Hill (Academic Media Technologies) 9E2Firestone Laboratory 50D4305 S Hill (Music House) 70E2Fleming House 57D4315 S Hill (Strategic Com (front) SFCC (rear)) 71E2Gates Annex 26B4315 S Wilson (Student-Faculty Programs) 122A2Gates-Thomas Laboratory 44C4345 S Hill (Alumni House) 97E2Guggenheim Laboratory 45C4355 S Holliston (Steele House) 94D3Hameetman Center 51D4363 S Hill (Einstein Papers House) 7E3Human Resources/Facilities Shops 84D3375 S Wilson (Prufrock House) 121A3Information Management Systems & Svcs  (IMSS) 10C1383 S Hill (Undergrad Admissions & Fin Aid) 90E3Jorgensen Laboratory 80D3383 S Hill Annex 90AE3Karman Laboratory 46C4391 S Wilson (Housing Shop) 135A3Keck Center 127B3415 S Hill Ave 220E3Keck Laboratories 78C3505 S Wilson (Tyson House/Caltech Y) 128A4Kellogg Radiation Laboratory 38C4515 S Wilson (Credit Union/Pkng & Security) 63A4Kerckhoff Annex 27AB4525 S Wilson (U.S. Geological Survey) 39A4Kerckhoff Laboratories 27B4535 S Wilson (Fitzhugh House/USGS) 65A4LIGO (40-Meter Lab) 69D3551 S Wilson (Investment Office) 42A4Linde Hall  37C4565 S Wilson (Audit Svcs & Inst Compliance) 64A4Linde Laboratory  24B4Alles Laboratory 28B4Lloyd House 54D4-E4 Annenberg Center for Info Sci and Tech (IST) 16D3Marks House 89E3Arms Laboratory 25B4Millikan Memorial Library 32B4Athenaeum 61E4Moore Laboratory 93C3Avery House 99D2Morrisroe Astroscience Laboratory (IPAC) 22B5Baxter Hall 77C3Mudd Laboratories - North 23B4Bechtel Residence 14C2-D2 Mudd Laboratories - South 21B4Beckman Auditorium 91C3Noyes Laboratory 72B3Beckman Behavioral Biology Labs (BBB) 76B3-C3 Page House 53D4Beckman Institute 74B3Parking Structure 1 (North Wilson Avenue) 123A3Blacker House 60E4Parking Structure 2 (South Wilson Avenue) 124A3Braun Athletic Center 3B5Parking Structure 3 (California Avenue) 126B5Braun House 88E3Parking Structure 4 (Holliston Avenue) 66E3Braun Laboratories 75B3Parsons-Gates Hall of Administration 31B4Bridge Annex 34B4Powell-Booth Laboratory 79D3Bridge Laboratory - East 33EB4Quantum Computing Laboratory (Q-Lab) 143E2Bridge Laboratory - West 33WB4Ramo Auditorium (in Baxter Hall) 77C3Broad Café 96CB3Ricketts House 59E4Broad Center for the Biological Sciences 96B3Ruddock House 55E4Brown Gymnasium 1B5Satellite Utility Plant 66BE3Building 15  15C1Schlinger Lab for Chemistry and Chem Engr 20B3Bungalow Court 139A3Sherman Fairchild Library 43C4Cahill Center for Astroscience & Astrophysics 17B5Spalding Lab (Eudora Spalding Lab) 41C4Caltech Childcare Center 133C5Spalding, Keith (Keith Spalding Building) 6B5Campus Housing Shop 136A3Steele Laboratory 81D3Catalina Graduate Housing 100-120 A2-A3 Student Activities Center 57BD4Central Engineering Services (CES) 85D3Student Services, Center for (CSS) 86E3Central Plant (incl. Cogen & Cooling Towers) 5B5Synchrotron Laboratory 49D4Chandler Dining Hall (Chandler Café) 52D4Transportation & Grounds Operations 82D3Chen Neuroscience Research Building 18B2Undergraduate Admissions & Financial Aid 90E3Church Laboratory 29B4Watson Laboratories 95C3-D3 Crellin Laboratory 30B4Young Health and Counseling Center 8C58General InformationSection OneGeneral Information9INTRODUCTIONCaltech, founded in 1891, is a world-renowned science and engineer -ing institute that marshals some of the world™s brightest minds and  most innovative tools to address fundamental scientific questions and  pressing societal challenges.  Caltech is small in size, but prizes excellence and ambition. Its stu-dents receive an education that is notable for its rigorous curriculum,  close collaborations with faculty, and small class sizes.  Students graduate from Caltech prepared to become world lead -ers in science, engineering, academia, industry, and public service.  Graduates are well trained in their ability to identify, analyze, and solve  challenging problems within and across science and engineering dis -ciplines, and are prepared to apply and communicate their expertise  broadl  y throughout their professional careers. An independent, privately supported institution, Caltech also man-ages the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)  for NASA and owns and  operates the Seismological Laboratory, more than 50 research centers  and institutes, and a global network of astronomical observatories,  including the Palomar and W. M. Keck observatories. The Institute also  co-founded and co-manages the Laser Interferometer Gravitational- wave Observatory (LIGO).The Institute™s extraordinary faculty, students, postdoctoral scholars,  and staff produce transformative breakthroughs in fields ranging from  quantum science and engineering to bioinformatics and the nature of  life itself, from human behavior and economics to energy and sustain -ability. Caltech faculty and alumni have earned national and internation -al recognition, including 45 Nobel Prizes.  Together with JPL, Caltech is Pasadena™s largest employer and a  source of programs that benefit the entire city. To learn more about Caltech, visit caltech.edu/about. MISSIONThe mission of the California Institute of Technology is to expand  human knowledge and benefit society through research integrated with  education. We investigate the most challenging, fundamental problems  in science and technology in a singularly collegial, interdisciplinary  atmosphere, while educating outstanding students to become creative  members of society. HISTORICAL SKETCHIn September of 1891, Pasadena philanthropist Amos G. Throop (pro -nounced Troop) established Throop University, the institution that would  eventually become Caltech.Throop University opened its doors with 31 students and a six-  member faculty. Throop might have remained simply a good local  school had it not been for the arrival in Pasadena of astronomer  George Ellery Hale. The first director of the Mount Wilson Observatory,  Introduction 10Hale became a member of Throop™s board of trustees in 1907 and  began molding the school into a first-class institution for engineering and scientific research and education. Hale would be joined later by chemist Arthur A. Noyes and physicist Robert A. Millikan. By 1920, the school was renamed the California  Institute of Technology, and the enrollment was nine graduate students  and 359 undergraduates, with a faculty of 60; a decade later there were  138 graduate students, 510 undergraduates, and a faculty of 180. At  the present time there are nearly 1,000 undergraduates, 1,300 graduate  students, and some 300 professorial faculty and more than 550 post -doctoral scholars.Caltech has more than 24,000 living alumni all over the world, many  of them eminent in their fields of engineering, science, law, medicine,  academia, and entrepreneurship. Caltech™s divisional structure, which began to coalesce in 1926,  today comprises the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering (BBE); the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (CCE); the Division of Engineering and Applied Science (EAS); the Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences (GPS); the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS); and the Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy (PMA). To learn more about Caltech™s his -tory and the people behind the Institute™s success, visit  archives.caltech.edu. EDUCATION AND RESEARCH Students at Caltech work toward undergraduate and graduate degrees  alongside their intellectual equals in an academic environment that  emphasizes interdisciplinary teamwork, critical thinking, mutual sup -port, and a deep understanding of core concepts and principles across  fields.Caltech students, faculty, and postdoctoral scholars are addressing  fundamental scientific questions and pressing societal challenges.  Together, they are expanding our understanding of the universe, shifting  paradigms, launching new fields, and inventing the technologies of the future.   Caltech is home to more than 50 research centers and institutes.  Some 90 percent of Caltech undergraduates participate in research  during their time here. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS AND RESEARCH Caltech offers undergraduates 28 majors (called ﬁoptionsﬂ) and 13  minors across the six academic divisions. The most popular options  are computer science, chemical engineering, electrical engineering,  mechanical engineering, and physics. Caltech also offers interdisci -plinary programs in applied physics, biochemistry, bioengineering,  computation and neural systems, control and dynamical systems,  environmental science and engineering, geobiology and astrobiology,  geochemistry, and planetary astronomy. General Information11The Institute offers the opportunity for qualified students to engage  in research early in their careers under the supervision of a faculty  member. There are four principal avenues for undergraduate research:  the senior thesis, the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships  (SURF) program, research courses for academic credit, and research  for pay under a faculty member™s grant or contract. The senior thesis involves original research under the mentorship of  a faculty member, an effort that develops research, writing, and pre -sentation skills that together provide an excellent preparation for future  graduate studies and/or professional life. The SURF program provides continuing undergraduate students the  opportunity to work on an individual research project in a tutorial rela -tionship with a mentor, usually a member of the Caltech/JPL research  community, but occasionally a faculty member at another college or  university. The work is carried out during a 10-week period in the sum -mer, after which SURF students submit a written report describing the  project, methods, and results of their work. Most options offer undergraduate research courses in order to  encourage research participation during the academic year; students  should consult listings and descriptions of opportunities.In some circumstances, faculty will hire students to conduct  research. Students should discuss this option with a prospective  mentor.  Students with work-study financial aid should also contact  Caltech™s Career Advising and Experiential Learning (CAEL) about how  to apply funding to research positions. Learn more about undergraduate programs and research at sfp. caltech.edu/.GRADUATE PROGRAMS AND RESEARCH Students can enroll in Master of Science, Degree of Engineer, Doctor  of Philosophy, BS/MS, and MD/PhD degree programs; the majority of  graduate students are enrolled in the PhD program.  The academic work of the Institute is organized into six divisions:  Biology and Biological Engineering (bbe.caltech.edu); Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (cce.caltech.edu); Engineering and Applied Science (eas.caltech.edu); Geological and Planetary Sciences (gps.caltech.edu); Humanities and Social Sciences (hss.caltech.edu); and Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy (pma.caltech.edu).  Graduate study at the Institute is divided further into a number of individual graduate options (degree programs), which are supervised  by those professors whose interests and research are closely related  to the area of the option. Entering graduate students are admitted into  one of these options. The most popular options for graduate work are  chemistry, physics, electrical engineering, and biology. Learn more at  gradoffice.caltech.edu. ACADEMIC PARTNERSHIPS Caltech maintains an array of external partnerships with other insti -tutions in Southern California. These partnerships provide pre-med  Education and Research 12students with opportunities to work in area hospitals and train with  practicing clinicians; allow students to participate in ROTC through a  joint program with USC; and offer a 3/2 dual degree for students from  13 select liberal-arts colleges. Caltech undergraduate students can  cross-register at Occidental College and Art Center College of Design,  and the Institute maintains relations with research partners such as the  Scripps Institution of Oceanography at UCSD. Undergraduate students  can also study abroad in Cambridge, Copenhagen, Edinburgh, London,  Paris, Melbourne, or the University of Chicago during their junior or  senior years For graduate students, joint programs between Caltech  and both the USC Keck School of Medicine and the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine grant MD/PhD degrees. FACULTY RESEARCH The contributions of Caltech™s faculty have earned national and interna -tional recognition. Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities (AAU) in 1934 and remains a research university with ﬁvery highﬂ research activity, primarily in STEM fields. Research is central to Caltech, and the Institute manages over $400 million in sponsored  awards annually. Its largest federal funding agencies are the National  Aeronautics Space Administration (NASA), National Science Foundation  (NSF), Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Defense, and Department of Energy. More than a quarter of Caltech™s  active and emeritus faculty members are members of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and/or are fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Caltech receives more  invention disclosures and holds more patents per faculty member than any other university in the United States.POSTDOCTORAL AND SENIOR POSTDOCTORAL SCHOLARSMore than 550 early-career scientists and engineers conduct research  at Caltech as postdoctoral scholars. In addition, JPL hosts postdoc-toral scholars whose studies cover many aspects of Earth, planetary,  astrophysical, and technology research. All scholars work under the  supervision of professorial faculty members or JPL researchers.  RESEARCH CENTERS AND INSTITUTESResearch centers and institutes across campus bring together scien -tists and engineers to collaborate and add innovative and diverse per-spectives to tackle society™s most pressing challenges. Among those  centers and institutes are:   Caltech, which seeks to deepen our understanding of the brain and how it works; -tion, and materials for fundamental research in chemistry and  biology;  General Information13 disciplinary research in the areas of nanoscience and nanotech -nology;  encourages intensive, fruitful collaborations between bioengi-neering researchers;  energy science and technology through research, education, and  communication;the Richard N. Merkin Institute for Translational Research Learn more about Caltech™s research centers and institutes at  caltech.edu/research/centers-institutes.  ON-CAMPUS ACADEMIC RESOURCES Center for Teaching, Learning, and Outreach (CTLO) The Center for Teaching, Learning, and Outreach (CTLO) supports  Caltech™s multifaceted educational efforts, including the design and  instruction of undergraduate and graduate courses and curricula, formal  and informal student learning, and educational outreach partnerships with  KŒ12 teachers and students. The CTLO is committed to advancing evi-dence-based, inclusive practices through our programs and services, and  to fostering innovation based on this foundation. CTLO focuses on:  Instructor Support: Supporting effective course design and teaching  methods for university faculty and teaching assistants (TAs). Topics  regularly addressed through individual consultations, training programs,  workshops, and courses include in-class techniques, choice and use of instructional technologies, feedback on teaching, and discipline-based educational research.   Student Learning: Fostering opportunities for students to grow as  teachers, mentors, and leaders. In addition to advising students on teaching and outreach-related projects, CTLO oversees the Caltech  Project for Effective Teaching (CPET), a graduate student-led com -munity offering seminars and Certificates of Interest and Practice  in University Teaching, and collaborates with the undergraduate  Academics and Research Committee (ARC) on course improvements,  course ombuds, and other initiatives. Educational Outreach: Helping faculty and students to develop  KŒ12 outreach programs, including collaborations with schools and  districts in Pasadena and Greater Los Angeles. CTLO assists faculty on  grant proposals with educational components, convenes educational  outreach coordinators from across Caltech™s divisions, runs signature  educational outreach programs for KŒ12 students and teachers during  the summer and year-round, and serves as an interface for partner  organizations offering KŒ12 opportunities at Caltech.  Learn more at ctlo.caltech.edu. Hixon Writing Center (HWC) The Hixon Writing Center (HWC) promotes excellence in writing and  communication. The HWC operates on the premise that writing is a  mode of discovery and learning as well as a tool for communication,  Education and Research 14and thus strong writing skills are fundamental to inquiry, learning, and  success across disciplines. The HWC works actively with Caltech students, faculty, and the  Caltech community. The HWC offers students the opportunity to  meet with professional and peer tutors to discuss works-in-progress;  these sessions help students accomplish short-term goals while they also promote the acquisition of skills that are valuable for long-term  success. The HWC regularly holds presentations and workshops on  communication-related topics that interest our students. HWC staff  members are available to consult with Caltech faculty and TAs about  best practices for incorporating, designing, and responding to writing  assignments in courses across all disciplines. Finally, the HWC spon -sors events and creates resources that support campus-wide dis -cussions about the roles writing and communication play in teaching,  learning, and research in science and engineering. The HWC is a part of the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, and it is funded in part by a generous donation from  Alexander P. and Adelaide F. Hixon. Learn more about current support  and programming at writing.caltech.edu. Caltech LibraryThe Caltech Library advances the Institute™s mission to expand human  knowledge by catalyzing information discovery and sharing. The library maintains extensive research collections, a variety of study spaces,  state-of-the-art knowledge-management platforms, and a user-focused  program of instruction and outreach.   The Sherman Fairchild Library (SFL) is the main library on campus.  SFL is open every day until midnight and offers a range of collaborative  and private study spaces including five bookable group study rooms  Laptops, Kindles, and electronic kits can be borrowed through the  Library™s eDevice lending program. All textbooks assigned for courses  are available for short-term use through the Library™s Course Reserves  service. The Library™s interlibrary loan service, DocuServe, is located on  the first floor of SFL. Users can obtain books and articles not owned by Caltech Library at no charge and typically within 24 hours.  SFL is complemented by three branch libraries: Humanities and  Social Sciences (Dabney), Astrophysics (Cahill), and Geology (North  Mudd). In addition, the Lookout, a flexible collaboration and study space with large displays is available on the 9th floor of Millikan.  The  TechHub, located on the first floor of Millikan Memorial Building, hous -es the library™s eDevice lending program and the Techlab, the Library™s  3-D printing service. Equipment available in the TechHub includes 3-D  printers in the Techlab as well as iPads, laptops, Kindles, and electronic  kits that can be borrowed for short- or long-term loans. The Caltech Library hosts the Caltech Collection of Open Digital Archives, or Coda. It consists of several digital repositories includ -ing CaltechAUTHORS, for research papers, monographs, and other  publications; CaltechTHESIS, for theses and dissertations; and CaltechDATA, for primary research data and computer code. Visit the Library™s website, library.caltech.edu, to access library col -lections and services or request research assistance from the library.  General Information15Archives and Special Collections The Caltech Archives and Special Collections facilitate understanding of  Caltech™s role in the history of science and technology, and of the research  and lives of its faculty, staff, and students. The Archives collect, organize,  preserve, exhibit, and make available for research the papers and other  materials that document this history, both tangible and virtual. Collections  include the personal and professional papers of Caltech faculty and alum -ni; Caltech records, publications, and websites; scientific instruments and  other artifacts; photographs; fine art; and rare books from the Scientific  Revolution to the present. These collections are available to both the  Caltech community and outside researchers; contact the Archives at 626- 395-2704 or archives@caltech.edu to arrange an appointment. More infor -mation, including guides to many collections and digital access to some,  can be found at archives.caltech.edu. EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY  & LEARNING OUTCOMESCaltech provides an outstanding education that prepares students to  become world leaders in science, engineering, academia, industry, and  public service. The Institute aims for these educational outcomes: Graduates can analyze, synthesize, and communicate ideas. Graduates demonstrate integrity, personal and professional  responsibility, and respect for others.  Bachelor of Science graduates can identify, analyze, and solve  challenging problems within and across science and engineering  disciplines. Bachelor of Science graduates can apply their analytic skills to other areas of knowledge and understand issues important in  our society.  Master of Science graduates can apply advanced knowledge in a specialized area in preparation for their professional careers.  Doctor of Philosophy graduates can independently identify, ana -lyze, and solve fundamental research problems with breadth and  depth.JET PROPULSION LABORATORY Founded by Caltech faculty and students in 1936 and located six miles  from campus on the border between Pasadena and La Cañada Flintridge,  the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which is managed by Caltech for  NASA, is the leading U.S. center for robotic space exploration. JPL™s 6,500  employees are tightly connected to the campus research mission and  together enable the Institute to push the frontiers of space and Earth sci -ence. JPL is currently responsible for operating 39 NASA missions, includ -ing the Curiosity and Perseverance Mars rovers, Juno Jupiter orbiter, and  the Sentinel-6/Michael Freilich Earth science mission, all of which are pio -neering new approaches for space exploration. Caltech and JPL engage  in collaborations and joint appointments of faculty, lecturers, and visitors.  Learn more at jpl.nasa.gov. Jet Propulsion Laboratory 16STUDENT LIFE UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT RESIDENCES  Seven of the undergraduate student residences are situated on either  side of the Olive Walk near the southeastern end of the campus. The  original fourŠBlacker, Dabney, Fleming, and RickettsŠwere built in  1931 from the plans of Mr. Gordon B. Kaufmann, in the Mediterranean  style to harmonize with the adjacent Athenaeum. The other three,  designed by Smith, Powell and Morgridge, were completed in 1960,  and are named Lloyd, Page, and Ruddock.  Each of these seven residences is a separate unit with its own dining  room and lounge, providing accommodations for between 65 and 100  students, depending on the facility. Each has its own elected officers;  a long history of shared governance gives students a great deal of  influence over their living environments. Residential life coordinators  (RLCs) are specially trained full-time university employees specializing  in college student development, community building, counseling, and crisis intervention. The RLCs supervise the resident associates (RAs)  on programming and overall student wellness. The RLCs also assist  Housing with the management and daily operations of the residences.  Each residence has one or more RA, who are typically graduate stu -dents. Mail is delivered daily to the student mailboxes. Students should  use their mailbox number, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,  CA 91126, to facilitate handling of mail at the campus post office. For  more information, please visit housing.caltech.edu. Avery House  Made possible by a gift from trustee R. Stanton Avery, this undergrad -uate residence and innovative residential complex was designed by  Moore, Ruble, Yudell, and completed in September 1996. Located at  the north end of the campus, Avery has an RLC, two RAs, two faculty  apartments, and rooms for about 136 undergraduates. Its dining facil -ities, meeting rooms, lounges, and library are designed to encourage  informal faculty-student interaction and to attract all members of the campus community to join in this interaction. Avery hosts programs  and social events that facilitate involvement between residents and fac -ulty in residence. Bechtel ResidenceEstablished in the fall of 2018 and located at the northeast edge of campus, the Bechtel Residence is the first residence to open on  campus since 1996. Bechtel is named in honor of Caltech life trustee Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr., the founder of the S. D. Bechtel Foundation.  The 95,000-square-foot residence is a multigenerational residence  open to all undergraduates with: 211 student bedrooms arranged as  singles and in suites; six RA and one RLC apartments; and two facul-ty-in-residence apartments. Bechtel was intentionally designed to pro -vide the community with the greatest flexibility to maximize space as  well as to encourage broader interaction, engagement, and residential  General Information17life programming among residents. The facility includes three kitchens;  eight common areas/study rooms; six laundry rooms; a 400-seat dining  hall and servery; and support spaces. STUDENT RESOURCES AND ACTIVITIES Hameetman CenterThe Hameetman Center, which opened in 2019, is a new campus  center built on the site of the former Winnett Student Center. The  Hameetman Center replaces Winnett as Caltech™s central community  gathering place. The 24,000-square-foot two-story center is named  in honor of the Hameetman Foundation and Caltech trustee Fred  Hameetman (BS ™62) and his wife, Joyce, who provided the initial fund -ing to initiate the design of the reimagined campus hub. It features a  large public lounge, an expanded Red Door Marketplace, the Caltech  Store, music rehearsal facilities, student club rooms, a multipurpose  room, and a conference room. The rehearsal facility is made possible  thanks to a gift from Emeritus Professor of Theoretical Physics Steven  Frautschi and his wife, Mie. Residential ExperienceThe Office of Residential Experience (ORE) has responsibility for the  oversight of Caltech™s residential programs, including programs carried  out in the undergraduate houses, graduate student residences, and the  Bechtel and Marks-Braun communities. The ORE works collaboratively  with the Residential Life Coordinators, Resident Advisors, the Interhouse  Committee, and other groups to ensure that student leaders in all our  residential communities are trained and that there are programs in place  to support their development. This is part of the shared governance that  is central to the Caltech residential experience. The residence experience  also includes member of the faculty who live in the undergraduate resi -dences. The Faculty in Residence (FIR) Team establishes an academic life  and culture in Bechtel and Avery House. FIRs bridge the classroom experi -ence by hosting regular conversations over dinner and develop specialized  academic programing, which can include: extracurricular activities, tours  and excursions, cooperative community service projects, special events,  and guest speaker programs. All residences and houses, including all their activities and programs,  are expected to comply with Institute policies, Student Affairs policies,  and the Caltech Code of Conduct. Potential Policy or Code of Conduct violations by a house or residence will be referred to the Caltech  Routing committee. If the Routing Committee determines that the incident(s) is part of a Residential or House program or activity, it will  be referred to ORE for further action. In this case, the Assistant Vice  President for Student Affairs and Residential Experience (AVP) or desig -nee, will either (a) manage the situation directly with the community so  the concerns can be addressed, or (b) initiate an investigation into the  incident. If an investigation is conducted, the investigators will report  their findings to the AVP who will make a decision concerning whether  any violations occurred and any consequences that may be imposed.  Student Life18The decision of the AVP may be appealed to the Vice President for  Student Affairs within 10 days of the decision.  During the investigation, the AVP can suspend activities of the house  or residence until further notice if deemed necessary for the health,  safety, or the other benefit of the community. A range of outcomes  may be considered as consequences to the house or residence if the  group is found to have engaged in a policy violation. Possible sanctions  including community education and/or suspension of the activity or event. Examples of events that warrant a response include an unreg -istered event or party, mistreatment of members, and hazing. If the  potential situation also includes a potential policy violation involving an individual student(s), the student(s) will be referred to the appropriate  Dean™s office and may be subject to disciplinary action. The Student Activities Center The SAC is located in the basement of the south undergraduate hous -ing complex and is open for student use 24 hours a day. The SAC  provides office space for the officers of the undergraduate student gov -ernment, working space for student publications, rehearsal space for  musical activities, and space for many other student-oriented functions.Whether students are interested in music, publications, student gov -ernment, gaming, photography, or simply finding a room for their group  to meet in, the SAC will probably have what is needed. The center also  houses the South House laundry room and has several club rooms, a  small library, a shop, and a movie screening roomŠmost are open 24  hours.Faculty-Student RelationsFaculty-student coordination and cooperation with regard to campus  affairs are secured through the presence of students on faculty com -mittees, by faculty-student conferences, and by other mechanisms. Freshman Advisers  Each member of the freshman class is assigned a faculty adviser and is  a member of a small advising group. The adviser follows the freshman™s  progress and provides advice on any questions or problems that the  freshman may have. Option Advisers Each member of the three undergraduate upper classes is assigned an  option adviser, a faculty member in the option in which the student is  enrolled. The adviser takes an interest in the student™s selection of courses  and progress toward a degree, and, eventually, in assisting the student  toward satisfactory placement in industry or in graduate school. Normally,  the association between student and adviser is established before the  beginning of the sophomore year and continues through graduation. Athletics, Physical Education, & Recreation (APER) Caltech supports an extensive program of competitive athletics. As a  member of NCAA Division III and the Southern California Intercollegiate  General Information19Athletic Conference, Caltech participates in intercollegiate competition  in 20 sportsŠ10 each for men and women. All teams compete during a regular season, with many also competing or qualifying for the con -ference tournament in their respective sport. Individual scholar-athletes  and teams distinguishing themselves can earn the privilege of partici -pating in NCAA regional and national championships. Caltech also sponsors vigorous club sports programs and intramural  competition. Club sports include Ultimate Frisbee, volleyball, badmin-ton and soccer. Intramural competitions are contested by residence  house teams in several sports, including soccer, dodgeball, kickball,  Ultimate Frisbee, basketball, volleyball, and floorball. Approximately 25  percent of Caltech undergraduates participate in intercollegiate athlet -ics and over 80 percent participate in some form of organized athletic  competition each year. Outdoor athletic facilities include a brand-new turf mixed-use baseball and soccer field, a second natural grass mixed-use field, an all-weather running track, eight tennis courts, and two 25-yard,  eight-lane swimming pools. Indoor facilities include two full-size gym-nasiums; four racquetball courts, two squash courts; a 5,000-square- foot weight room, satellite weight room and more than 55 pieces of  cardio-respiratory equipment, including treadmills, exercise bikes and  ellipticals; and a large multipurpose room for dance/aerobics, martial  arts and a variety of group fitness courses. The department is also responsible for management of Caltech™s  recreation programs and physical education curriculum.  More information can be found at gocaltech.com. Interhouse Activities The president of each undergraduate house represents that house on  the Interhouse Committee (IHC), which helps to handle matters affect -ing the houses, in conjunction with staff from Student Affairs. Members  of the IHC are expected to be enrolled and in good standing, both aca -demically (eligible, and not on probation) and disciplinarily (not on pro -bation), during their tenure in office. The IHC works in conjunction with  the APER department to conduct intramural competitions as described above, and conducts its own Discobolus Trophy competition, in which  a house may challenge the house holding the trophy to a mutually  agreed upon contest. ASCITThe undergraduate student body forms the membership of a corpo -ration known as the Associated Students of the California Institute of  Technology, Inc., or ASCIT. Governed by a board of directors consisting  of six elected officers, it is involved in many aspects of student life;  oversees publication of The Tech, our undergraduate student news -paper; the Big T yearbook; a literary magazine called Totem; and the  Little t, which provides lots of helpful information to incoming students.  A directory, along with other student information, such as campus  positions, links to the Interhouse Committee (IHC) and Academics and Research Committee (ARC), and other helpful information is available  online at donut.caltech.edu.Student Life20Besides overseeing student publications and coordinating activities  and policies, the ASCIT Board of Directors administers the corpora -tion™s finances. ASCIT sponsors a wide variety of special-interest clubs  and programs, working closely with Student Activities and Programs  part of the Office of Residential Experience. The student government  is active in campus affairs. The student members of standing faculty  committee ensure that undergraduate opinion is considered seriously.  Excellent informal relations between students and faculty and between  students and administration promote discussion of mutual concern and  goodwill. Student-faculty conferences are held every other year and  serve to promote communication mainly around academic topics. Graduate Student CouncilThe Graduate Student Council (GSC) is the student government for  Caltech graduate students. It is the mission of the GSC to maximize the quality of life for the graduate student community at Caltech. The GSC Board of Directors interacts with the Institute™s administrative  bodies and is formed of subcommittees dedicated to academic sup-port, advocating graduate student issues, sharing student news, and organizing social events. Student Leadership ExpectationsGraduate and undergraduate student leaders who are in either elected  or appointed positions must be enrolled and in good standing with the  Institute.Honor SystemThe Honor Code, embodied in the phrase ﬁNo member shall take unfair  advantage of any other member of the Caltech community,ﬂ is the fun -damental principle of conduct for all students and extends to all phases  of campus life, including scholastic and extracurricular activities, relations  among students, and relations between students and faculty. The Honor  System is the most important tradition of the undergraduate student body.  The Board of Control (Board), which is composed of elected student  representatives, is charged with monitoring the academic Honor System  for undergraduates, investigating course work violations, and making  recommendations to the dean of undergraduate students. The purpose,  composition, duties, and procedures of the Board, as well as the roles  and responsibilities of the deans, faculty, vice president for student affairs,  complainants (students reporting suspected violations), respondents  (those against whom an allegation of an academic Honor System viola-tion is made), witnesses, and other participants in the process, are set  forth in Article XIII of the Associated Students of the California Institute of  Technology bylaws. The Board investigates the allegations of academic  Honor Code violations by interviewing the respondent and any witnesses,  and assessing the relevant evidence, and votes on recommendations to  the dean about whether or not an Honor Code violation has been commit-ted and its scope (conviction/dismissal), how to nullify the unfair advantage  gained (nullification), and how to uphold the Honor Code and protect the  Caltech community from future violations (protection). The dean makes the  General Information21decisions after considering the Board™s case report and any objections and  further evidence raised by the respondent.    The concepts of conviction, nullification, and protection are  described in greater depth in the Honor Code Handbook provided to all  students and available on line at deans.caltech.edu/HonorCode. The Conduct Review Committee, composed of students, faculty,  and staff, hears cases involving non-academic Honor System and  Institute policy violations for undergraduate students, and also makes  recommendations to the dean. At their discretion, the dean of under -graduate students, or their designee, may directly handle a matter  also involving the Honor System, the Code of Conduct, and Institute Policies for undergraduate students. The Honor System is also an important part of graduate student life. The dean of graduate studies is responsible for reviewing and making  decisions concerning alleged Honor Code violations with respect to  course-work. The Graduate Honor Council (GHC) serves as a consul-tative resource to the dean. At their discretion, the dean of graduate  studies may request that the GHC investigate and hear a case, and  provide its recommendations to the dean for final review and decision.  All Members of the Graduate Honor Council must be in good standing with the Office of Graduate Studies and must attend a formal training  before they may serve on a case. Examples of Honor Code violations  include, but are not limited to, plagiarism, violations of the collaboration  policy in a class, and/or using resources that were strictly prohibited for  homework and/or exams. Incidents that are not handled by the dean  of graduate studies include accusations of research misconduct, which  are handled by the Office of Research Compliance; grade disputes,  which are handled by the office of the provost. Institute Policy viola -tions are handled by the office of the dean of graduate studies or the  appropriate administrative organization. Student Body PublicationsThe publications of the student body include a weekly paper, The  California Tech; an undergraduate research journal, CURJ; a literary  magazine, Totem; a student handbook, the Little t, which gives a survey  of student activities and organizations and serves as a campus direc -tory; a yearbook, Big T; an online undergraduate research opportunities  handbook, UROH; and Caltech Letters, an online campus publication designed to let students talk about their research and their viewpoints  on science with the broader world. These publications, staffed entirely  by students, provide an opportunity for interested students to obtain  valuable experience in creative writing, photography, artwork, reporting  and editing, advertising, and business management.Performing and Visual Arts The Institute provides directors and facilities for choirs, concert band,  jazz band, symphony orchestra, numerous chamber music ensembles,  guitar classes, a theater program, ceramics and studio arts classes.  These activities are centered in the Music and Theater Arts houses on  Hill Avenue along the eastern edge of campus. Student Life22Student ClubsAll student clubs must be officially recognized in order to be in and  remain in good standing with the Institute. To become officially recog -nized, the club must annually apply for recognition. You will find details  regarding this process outlined in the Student Club Handbook, which is  available on the Office of Residential Experience website (ore.caltech. edu).Once the club is officially recognized, it may plan on maintaining that  recognition for the duration of the current academic year. The details  of how to remain in good standing with the Institute are outlined in  detail within the Student Club Handbook. These details include club oversight, privileges, responsibilities, finances, and other very important  information. A recognized club will receive the following privileges: the  ability to recruit members; advertise events; secure funding; conduct  officer elections; provide trainings and use Institute facilities for meet -ings and events. Additional, key elements of club recognition include  but are not limited to, having an advisor, an appropriate purpose, and  a leadership infrastructure. Note that only recognized clubs will be  allowed to participate in the annual Club Fair. Clubs at Caltech are expected to follow Institute policy, Student  Affairs policies, and the Caltech Code of Conduct. Potential policy  or Code of Conduct violations by a club or in connection with a club event will be referred to the assistant vice president for student affairs  and residential experience (AVP) or their designee, will either (a) man -age the issue with the club through an appropriate Institute response,  or (b) initiate an investigation into the incident. If an investigation is conducted, the investigators will report their findings to the AVP who  will make a decision concerning whether any violations occurred and  any consequences that may be imposed. The decision of the AVP may  be appealed to the vice president for student affairs within 10 days of  the decision. During the investigation, the AVP may suspend the club™s recog -nition and planned activities, if deemed necessary, for the health,  safety, or other benefit of the community. A range of outcomes may be  considered as consequences to the club if the group is found to have  engaged in a policy violation. Possible sanctions examples include education, suspension of some or all of the group™s privileges, or loss  of their recognition status with the Institute. If the potential situation  also includes a potential policy violation involving an individual stu-dent(s), the student(s) will be referred to the appropriate Dean™s office  and may be subject to disciplinary action.Caltech Center for Inclusion & Diversity (CCID)The Caltech Center for Inclusion & Diversity (CCID) mission is to pro -vide education, advocacy, and allyship in order to increase institutional  and personal capacity for diversity and ensure a community committed  to equity and inclusive excellence. We create and implement cam -pus-wide initiatives and programs that will increase the knowledge,  skills, and attitudes for all members of the Caltech community to thrive in a diverse world.General Information23Awareness and Education.  We are committed to building the  capacity for cultural competencies, skills, and action by designing workshops and trainings appropriate for all constituents on campus.  We value consistent assessment and formative feedback to facilitate  sustainable and lasting change.Advocacy through Collaboration. We actively engage with the  Caltech community to promote and provide access to information and  resources that help achieve our academic and personal goals. The  CCID provides programs and services to meet the specific needs of  racially underrepresented groups, women, all sexual and gender identi -ties (LGBTQ+), underserved, and ally communities on campus.Allyship. We create spaces and skill-building opportunities for all  members of the community to engage with issues related to their mul -tiple identities. We provide resources and promote an environment that  is supportive for all.If you are interested in getting involved with CCID, please check the  center website: diversity.caltech.edu.  The Caltech Y The Caltech Y is a student-driven nonprofit organization on cam -pus. Founded by students for students, the Y challenges the Caltech community to see the world with a broader perspective and a deeper  understanding of social issues. Y programs focused on community  service and activism, outdoor adventures, social activities, and cultural  events encourage students to become active participants in the world. With the help of Y staff, student leaders plan and lead events, trips,  and initiatives on campus and beyond. Some of the many Y programs  include the Rise tutoring program, the Y hike in the California Sierras,  Alternative Spring Break, Make-a-Difference Day, World Fest, the  Student Activism Speaker Series, and the D.C. Science Policy Trip. The  Y also provides services to the Caltech community, such as low-cost  audio visual and camping equipment rentals, discounted tickets, and  much more. For more information about student planning meetings,  email caltechy@caltech.edu or check out our website at caltechy.org.  Follow us on Facebook at facebook.com/caltechy and Instagram at instagram.com/caltechy. Religious ObservationCaltech has a quiet room for prayer, mediation, quiet reflection and  religious observation. The quiet room is located in the Hameetman  Student Center. For information about religious clubs, see the Student  Clubs website at ore.caltech.edu. Special MealsIf you have a dietary restriction that requires a special request,  please contact Caltech Dining Services at dining@caltech.edu. If your restriction rises to the level of a disability, please visit the Caltech  Accessibility Services for Students (CASS) website at cass.caltech.edu to request accommodation. Student Life24Registration for Student Sponsored Events Student events, including parties, activities, and programs that are  hosted by a house or residence, are a privilege at Caltech and are  part of the social framework of the Institute, but must be conducted in a safe and legally compliant manner. We expect the student body  to follow laws, polices, guidelines for events, use common sense, and good judgement. All events all events must be registered; for additional  information and to complete your Student Event Registration online, visit spa.caltech.edu. Student Auxiliary Services The Student Auxiliary Services, Gift & Technology Store (caltechstore. caltech.edu) is located on the first floor of the Hameetman Center.  Established in the 2018Œ2019 academic year with a lead gift from  The Hameetman Foundation, the Hameetman Center (formerly the Winnett Student Center) is now renamed in the Foundation™s and Fred  Hameetman (BS ™62) and his wife, Joyce™s honor. Owned and oper -ated by the Institute, the store serves the students, faculty, and staff,  carrying a stock of Caltech authors™ books, insignia merchandise,  gift items, school supplies, computer hardware, and accessories that  support Caltech™s educational and research mission. Also located on  the first floor of the Hameetman Center is the redesigned Red Door  Marketplace that offers freshly brewed coffee and tea, full menu, and  bakery items.STUDENT WELLNESS SERVICES GENERAL INFORMATION During the coronavirus pandemic, many services will be conducted  remotely. A full description of the range of services and programs  offered by Student Wellness Services can be found at wellness.caltech. edu. Student Wellness Services is committed to supporting the health  and emotional well-being of Caltech students. Through individualized  treatment planning, consultation, and outreach, we provide direct ser -vices and community-level interventions to improve student wellness  and allow students to focus on their pursuit of academic success and holistic development. All enrolled students, regardless of insurance  coverage, are eligible for basic medical and psychological care, crisis  counseling, and occupational therapy at Student Wellness Services,  through payment of the health fee. Students who require specialty or  longer-term care beyond the scope of what Student Health Services  provides will be referred to community providers using their health  insurance; costs associated with this care are the responsibility of the  student.A full description of the range of services and programs offered by  Student Wellness Services can be found at wellness.caltech.edu. General Information25HEALTH FORMS  Prior to initial registration, each admitted student is required to submit  entrance health forms that include medical and immunization history.  Information regarding immunization requirements and the completion  of the health forms are posted on the New and Prospective Student  website (wellness.caltech.edu/resources/new-students). Matriculating  students will receive access to the Student Health Portal to enable  secure online upload of the forms. Health forms must be received no  later than August 15, 2021. Failure to meet this requirement will result  in a registration hold, and students will be unable to register for winter  term classes until clearance is complete. COVID-19 VACCINATION Per Caltech™s updated vaccination policy, all undergraduate and  graduate students who enroll in Caltech's academic program for the  2021Œ22 Academic Year must submit proof of full vaccination against  COVID-19 by the prescribed deadline. Caltech will require immuniza -tion against COVID-19, with exemptions for medical contraindications only. Students must upload their documentation via the Student Health  Portal. Failure to meet this requirement will result in a registration hold,  effective immediately: new students will be unable to register for fall  term classes, and returning students will be dropped from any regis -tered classes until clearance is complete. Additional information about  Caltech™s Vaccination Policy is available at: studentaffairs.caltech.edu/ policies/vaccination-policy.  STUDENT HEALTH INSURANCE Students have the option to waive the Caltech student insurance plan  (United HealthCare Student Resources) during the waiver period each year,  provided they show proof of adequate alternative coverage. Students will  be automatically enrolled in the Caltech plan if a waiver is not submitted.  The Caltech plan provides coverage (with deductible and copay) for most  hospital and surgical costs, as well as the cost of outpatient treatment for  injury, illness, and psychotherapy. Students must be enrolled in order to  maintain eligibility for coverage. Students on an approved medical leave  can continue coverage for up to one year; the cost of the plan premiums  will be the responsibility of the student. Complete coverage and exclusion  details can be found here: benefits.caltech.edu/health/students/medical.  If the Caltech plan has been waived, students are advised to ensure that  their alternative coverage provides access to medical and mental health  providers close to campus. Student Wellness Services 26CALTECH ACCESSIBILITY SERVICES  FOR STUDENTS (CASS)GENERAL INFORMATION Caltech Accessibility Services for Students (CASS) seeks to provide  students with disabilities with equal access to all Institute programs,  activities and services. Caltech is committed to maintaining a diverse academic community, and welcoming individuals with a broad spec -trum of talents and experiences to its campus and programs. Students  with disabilities, actively participating in all aspects of the Caltech experience, are an essential part of that diversity. CASS will make every reasonable effort to provide academic adjust -ments and other reasonable accommodations to otherwise qualified  students with known disabilities, including temporary conditions, con-sistent with Caltech's obligations under applicable law; including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.CASS will maintain the confidentiality of all student records as  required by law, and only shares necessary information with faculty,  staff, and housing when given a student™s consent. Disability accom -modations will not appear on a student™s transcript. Students may visit the CASS website at cass.caltech.edu for more  information about the process of registering for disability accommo -dations and documentation guidelines. Completed CASS applications may take up to 30 days to process, so students are encouraged to  submit applications in a timely manner. CALTECH CARE TEAM GENERAL INFORMATION The CARE Team is a multidisciplinary group of professional staff from  key areas of the Institute. Each member brings knowledge and exper -tise in their field, including mental health, crisis intervention, student development, staff consultation, campus security, academic support,  and residential life. The CARE Team also collaborates with many other  entities across campus including athletics, the Equity and Title IX  Office, the Center for Inclusion & Diversity, Student Faculty Programs,  International Student Programs, Career Advising and Experiential  Learning, and the academic divisions. The CARE Team connects students with resources and  support. Through early identification of academic difficulties, social concerns,  behavioral disruptions, and health issues, the CARE Team can partner  with students to create individualized plans to help mitigate crises and  promote success. The behaviors listed below, especially when more  than one are present, may be signs of distress: Mood or behavior changesChanges in personal hygieneSocial withdrawalGeneral Information27Excessive absences from class or lab Persistent disinterest or disengagement in work Escalated substance useTalking about death, dying, or suicide Disruptive and/or aggressive behavior Threatening language or social media postings The CARE Team will collaborate with the referring party to create  a support plan, which may include outreach, academic or personal  counseling, referral to campus support services, and other relevant  resources. Referrals to the CARE Team can be made at: caltechcares.caltech.edu. CAREERS ADVISING AND EXPERIENTIAL  LEARNING (CAEL)GENERAL INFORMATION  Career Advising and Experiential Learning (CAEL) aims to support stu -dents, postdocs, and recent alumni in their pursuit of a fulfilling career,  including career pathways within, or at the intersection of, science, engi -neering, academia, industry, and public service.   CAEL offers a myriad of programs and services thoughtfully designed  with the goal of meeting the career and professional development needs  of Caltech students and postdocs, a group that is highly technical, often  ambitious, and concurrently engaged in rigorous time-intensive academic  and research programs. Importantly, CAEL, in partnership with the  aca -demic divisions, has adopted a hub-and-spoke model for career services.  CAEL acts as the central hub, overseeing core services such as employer  relations and career coaching while working closely with the academic  divisions to develop and maintain joint, targeted programs. This model  allows for both independent and embedded programming within the  academic divisions, providing for a stronger bridge between traditional  coursework and a meaningful career, whether that career be in academia,  industry, or the public sector. Joint programs run by CAEL and an aca -demic division(s) are open to all Caltech students, postdocs, and recent  alumni regardless of option.  CAEL takes a holistic approach to student development and career  education, partnering closely with faculty, student and postdoc leadership,  Student Wellness Services, the Hixon Writing Center, the Caltech Alumni  Association, the Caltech Center for Inclusion & Diversity, Student Faculty  Programs, International Student Programs, the Office of Residential  Experience, the Center for Teaching, Learning, and Outreach, and the  Caltech Y, in order to provide relevant and timely professional development  opportunities and programming.  CAREER SERVICES AND EMPLOYER RELATIONS CAEL develops and maintains robust relationships with potential employ -ers in areas of particular interest to Caltech students, postdocs, and recent  alumni, such as science, engineering, technology, finance, consulting, and  Careers Advising and Experiential Learning 28the public sector. Through on-campus and virtual recruiting programs,  CAEL supports employer-student engagement. CAEL maintains a platform  through which approved employers are able to post appropriate job and  internship opportunities, view the profiles and resumes of participating  students, postdocs, and alumni, and schedule information sessions and  interviews. CAEL hosts a diverse range of companies who send represen -tatives to campus to talk to Caltech students and postdocs about full-time  employment and internship opportunities through career fairs, information  sessions, and on-campus interviews. CAEL and the academic divisions,  through joint programs, host employers for events such as industry days,  tech talks, employer office hours, and dinners for eight. CAEL is also  responsible for developing and enforcing recruiting guidelines, protecting  the interests of students and postdocs, while respecting the needs of  employers.CAREER COACHING, MENTORSHIP, AND EDUCATION CAEL offers programs and services targeted at each stage of the career  development cycle including career exploration, job and internship search  strategies and preparation, graduate and professional school preparation  and application processes, career planning, and further professional devel -opment. Students, postdocs, and recent alumni can schedule individual  appointments for career coaching, document review, and mock interviews;  participate in workshops focused on skill building; and attend networking  events. Career and vocational interest tests can be taken on the rec -ommendation of a career coach. CAEL runs peer and alumni mentoring  programs in addition to employing professional career coaches. Peer and  alumni mentors provide additional perspectives and are a complementary  resource available to students and postdocs.  CAEL partners with the academic divisions to offer curricular educa -tion and opportunities. CAEL assists with the organization and manage -ment of career related courses as well as arranging for guest speakers  and supporting career related curriculum design.   CAEL provides advice on applying to Ph.D., master™s, and pro -fessional programs in the sciences or applied sciences, engineering,  economics, medicine, public health, environmental sciences, business,  law, and other fields. Workshops and individual advising are available  on the graduate school admissions process, essay writing, and related  topics. Students planning to apply to graduate or professional school  are encouraged to plan ahead and to utilize the resources of CAEL in  making  and implementing choices related to graduate studies. PRE-HEALTH ADVISING Students planning to apply to medical, dental, veterinary, or phar -maceutical graduate school have access to a wide range of advising services through CAEL. Students can obtain relevant medical research  experience through the Caltech summer preceptorship program, which  has placements with hospitals in the LA area. The pre-health adviser is  available to work with students throughout the process from freshman  year to graduation. CAEL works closely with the academic divisions and option advisers to support availability and  alignment of academic coursework with medical school requirements across multiple options.  General Information29ON-CAMPUS EMPLOYMENT AND WORK-STUDYOn-campus employers including those within the academic divisions are encouraged to make use of CAEL™s job platform in order to adver -tise and recruit student employees. (See also the student employment  section on page 222.)CALTECH ALUMNI ASSOCIATION The Caltech Alumni Association (CAA) empowers students and alumni to  connect with each other and build meaningful professional relationships  through CAA programs, events, and networking platforms. Alumni are  encouraged to share with current students their experiences and wisdom  gained since graduating from Caltech. We welcome all students to the  CAA as future alumni and are proud to grant CAA membership to all new  alumni upon graduation. The Caltech Alumni House is located at 345  South Hill Ave, Pasadena CA, 91106. Learn about our programs for stu -dents and alumni and get involved at alumni.caltech.edu.INTERNATIONAL STUDENT PROGRAMS As the definitive immigration resource for international students,  International Student Programs (ISP) is responsible for advising stu -dents on all immigration-related matters, such as visa acquisition,  employment authorization, extensions of stay, and more. In addition,  ISP provides programs that assist international students and their  dependents in adjusting to life in the United States. ISP plans and pro -motes events that celebrate international education and cultures of the  world, address cross-cultural adjustment, and provide opportunities for  international students to establish a sense of community at Caltech.  Prior to the fall term, ISP hosts International Student Orientation to pro -vide an introduction to academic and social life at Caltech and in the  United States. All incoming international students are required to par -ticipate. Please contact ISP at isp@caltech.edu for more information on  current programs, or visit ISP online at international.caltech.edu. AUDITING COURSES Persons affiliated with the Institute may audit courses if they obtain  the consent of the instructor in charge of the course, and the dean of  undergraduate students or dean of graduate studies, as appropriate,  and pay the required fee (contact the Bursar™s Office for audit fee). The  fees are nonrefundable.  Auditing cards may be obtained in the Registrar™s Office.    Regularly enrolled students and members of the faculty are not  charged for auditing. Auditing cards are not required, but the instruc -tor™s consent is necessary in all cases. No grades for auditors are  reported to the Registrar™s Office, and no official record is kept of the  work done.Auditing Courses30GRADES AND GRADING  All permanent grades recorded for freshmen during the first and sec -ond terms they are enrolled will be either P, indicating ﬁpassed,ﬂ or  F, indicating ﬁfailed.ﬂ The temporary grade of I (ﬁincompleteﬂ) may be  used as it is for other students. The temporary grade of E may be given to freshmen as described below for other students. It may also be used  in a continuing course if the performance of the freshman concerned  is not significantly below the current passing level, and if the student is  maintaining a steady and substantial improvement; an E given for this  reason will be automatically changed to a P if the freshman earns a P  for the following term, and will change to an F if the student receives an  F for the following term. The grade may not be used in this way for two successive terms nor for the last term of the course.If a first-quarter or second-quarter freshman is enrolled in a course  in which the instructor gives letter grades, the registrar will record P for  all passing grades. No grades given to a freshman during the first and  second quarter in which they are enrolled will be used in computing the  cumulative grade-point average.For all students beyond the first and second quarters of their fresh -man year, graduate and undergraduate, letter grades will ordinarily be  used to indicate the character of the student™s work: A, excellent; B,  good; C, satisfactory; D, poor; E, conditional; F, failed; I, incomplete.  P may also be used as described below under Pass/Fail Grading. In addition, grades of A+ and AŒ, B+ and BŒ, C+ and CŒ, and D+ may be used. In any situation in which no grade is reported, the grade shall be  assumed to be F. Failed. Means that no credit will be recorded for the course. The  units, however, count in computing the student™s grade-point aver -age, unless the course was taken on a pass/fail basis. The student may register to repeat the subject in a subsequent term and receive  credit without regard to the previous grade, the new grade and units  being counted as for any other course, but the original F and units for the course remain on the record. Grades other than E, I, and W are  assumed to be based on work completed and evaluated at the time of grade submission. E and I GradesE Grades. At their discretion, instructors may give students who have  not completed their work for a course by the end of the term a grade of E. The grade E indicates deficiencies that may be made up without repeating the course. If the instructor does not specify a date on the  grade report sheet for completion of the work, students receiving an E  will have until Add Day of the following term to complete their work for that course. Instructors may, however, require the work for the course  to be completed by an earlier date. In addition, students should be aware that E grades can impact ability to meet eligibility requirements.  If an E grade impacts a student™s academic standing, the grade may be  due by the first day of classes. See section Scholastic Requirements  for additional information. If a student receives an E and does not complete the work by the  General Information31date specified by the instructor or by Add Day (or a different date spec -ified by the instructor), the grade will be changed to an F. Adequate  time must be afforded to instructors to grade the work and to submit  the final grade to the registrar.  It is the responsibility of a student receiving an E to confirm that the  registrar has recorded the terms for satisfying the completion of the  work in the course.With the written permission of the instructor, a student may extend  the E grade past Add Day of the following term, but doing so will cause an additional E grade to be registered. Each additional extension of the  E will be until the date specified by the instructor or until Add Day of the following term, but in each case will require the written permission  of the instructor and the registering of an additional E grade. E Count Limitations. After an undergraduate student has been  awarded the grade of E six times, they are not eligible to receive E  grades in any subsequent term. A petition for an E in a subsequent term may be approved by the Undergraduate Academic Standards  and Honors (UASH) Committee in an exceptional case. Such a petition requires the support of the instructor and the dean or associate dean of  undergraduate students. I Grades. The grade I is given only in case of sickness or other emergency that justifies noncompletion of the work at the usual time.  It is given at the discretion of the instructor, after approval by the dean  or associate dean of students or the dean of graduate studies. If a student is seeking an I grade due to a severe exacerbation or onset of  a disability that occurred during the term, they should contact Caltech  Accessibility Services for Students (CASS) at cass@caltech.edu.The time period within which the grade of I is to be made up should be indicated on the grade sheet, or students receiving an I will have  until Add Day of the following term to complete their work for the course. In addition, students should be aware that I grades can impact  ability to meet eligibility requirements. If an I grade impacts a student™s  academic standing, the grade may be due by the first day of classes. See section Scholastic Requirements for additional information.  Students receiving grades of E or I should consult with their instructors,  and one of the deans, at the time of issue regarding the work required  and the time allowed. This time should, in most cases, coincide with the  date fixed in the calendar for removal of conditions and incompletes (Add  Day), and in fact if no other time is specified, this date will be assumed.  However, except under extraordinary circumstances, the time for the com -pletion of the work will not be extended beyond one year after the date in  which the grade of E or I was given. In the absence of an earlier deadline,  an E will turn into an F one year after the date on which the E was given,  and an I grade will turn into a W (standing for ﬁwithdrawnﬂ) one year after  the date on which the I grade was given. Waiving of this one year rule  is done in only the most exceptional of circumstances and requires the  agreement, before that one year anniversary, of the dean of undergraduate  students, chair of UASH, and executive officer of the department in which  the course was taken.  Grades of E and I shall not be considered in calculating a student™s  grade-point average.Grades and Grading32Petitions and ExceptionsOnce recorded, a grade will only be changed on the basis of  error. Such a change may be made only with the approval of the  Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee or of the  Graduate Studies Committee, whichever has jurisdiction.Petitions by undergraduate students for late drops (i.e., requests  to drop a course after Drop Day) will be considered by the UASH  Committee, but will only be approved if circumstances beyond the  student™s control prevented them from dropping a course or courses by  the posted deadline. Such petitions must be submitted before the end  of the term following the term when the course was taken, or within the first term of return, if the student is on leave in the term following the  term when the course was taken. If approved, a W will be recorded on  the student™s transcript in place of a grade for that course. W™s will not  be included in the computation of the student™s grade-point average.  Courses will be expunged from the student™s record only in exceptional  circumstances, at the discretion of the UASH Committee.  Petitions from graduating seniors submitted later than the first UASH  meeting following graduation (which normally takes place shortly after graduation) will not be accepted for consideration, except to correct an  error by the Institute. Grade-Point Average Grade-point average is computed by dividing the total number of cred -its earned in a term or an academic year by the total number of units  taken in the corresponding period. Units for which a grade of F has  been received are counted, even though the course may have subse -quently been repeated. Grades of P or F obtained in courses graded on  a pass/fail basis are not included in computing grade-point average. Each course at the Institute is assigned a number of units corre -sponding to the total number of hours per week devoted to that sub-ject, including classwork, laboratory, and the normal outside prepara -tion. Credits are awarded as shown in the table below. No. of   UnitsA+AAŒB+BBŒC+CCŒD+DF144433322211029877655433203131211109876543041716151312119875405222018171513121087506262422201816141210860730282623211916141297083532292724211916131180939363330272421181512901043403733302723201713100General Information3311484440373329262218151101252484440363228242016120135652484339353026221713014615651474237332823191401565605550454035302520150 Pass/Fail Grading, the following regulations apply First-quarter and second-quarter freshmen receive pass/fail  grades in all courses by virtue of their classification as fresh -men by an admissions committee or, for students whose status  after the first year is uncertain, by the Undergraduate Academic  Standards and Honors Committee. All other students, undergraduate and graduate, in courses with  numbers under 200 will receive letter grades unless the course  is designated ﬁgraded pass/fail™™ or unless, when it is allowed,  the student submits a change to the course™s grading scheme  on or before Drop Day. In courses with numbers 200 or greater that are not designated  either ﬁgraded pass/fail™™ or ﬁletter grades only,™™ the instructor may  decide separately for each student what class of grades to use.All research courses shall be designated ﬁgraded pass/fail.™™  All reading courses, seminar courses, or other courses that do  not have a formal class structure shall be designated ﬁgraded  pass/fail™™ unless the option secures an exemption from the  Curriculum Committee or the Graduate Studies Committee and from the Faculty Board. A grade on the pass/fail system should be P if it would have been a D or better on the letter grade system. (Note that there is  no DŒ grade.) The standards of failure in courses in which only  pass/fail grades are used should be the same as they would be  if the course were letter graded. Any instructor may, at their discretion, specify prior to registra -tion that their course, if not classified by the above regulations,  is to be graded on a ﬁletter grades only™™ basis or is to be graded  pass/fail only, subject to possible review by the responsible  option. The registrar must be notified of such specification two  weeks before the beginning of registration. (Note: If the grading  scheme is changed during the term, it is changed for everyone.)Each term, any student may select, subject to requirements  imposed by the student™s option, two elective courses in which  they are to be graded on a pass/fail basis if the course is  not designated as ﬁletter grades only™™ and is not specifically  required for the degree in their option. To make this election, a  student must submit a change to the course™s grading scheme  in REGIS, or submit a written request to the Registrar™s Office,  on or before Drop Day. This election may be reversed or rein -stated at any time before the deadline. Students must resubmit  their schedule in REGIS after all changes, and the pass/fail elec-tion must be approved by the student™s adviser. The instructor  must allow any eligible student to make this election.Grades and Grading34Of the units offered to satisfy the requirements for the Bachelor  of Science degree, no more than 90 may be in courses graded  pass/fail because of the student™s election (this does not include  those courses taken in the first two terms freshmen year or  those designated pass/fail by the instructor, option, or curricu -lum committee).Procedures for Resolving Disputes over Grading At Caltech, the instructor has full responsibility for assigning grades to  students enrolled in a course. On occasion, a student may not under -stand how a grade was determined and may seek further information. The student should first meet with the instructor or teaching assistant to discuss the grade. If after doing so the student believes the grade is unjustified or capricious, the following procedures are available. Before the end of the term following the term when the grade was  issued, the student should contact the academic mediator, appointed  by the provost, who will work with the student and instructor to resolve  the problem. If the mediation effort is unsatisfactory to the student,  they may request a formal review by an appropriate executive officer or  academic officer. The executive officer will review the case and report  the decision in writing to the student. If the executive officer decides  that a change of grade is warranted, or if the student requests a further  appeal, these shall be requested of the division chair. At the discretion  of the division chair, a committee may be appointed to review the case.  The committee members should interview everyone involved in the case (the student, the course instructor, the teaching assistant, and  anyone else with relevant information), and make a written recommen -dation to the division chair. Only the division chair can authorize the  registrar to enter a new grade in the student™s transcript. NOTICES AND AGREEMENTSACADEMIC RECORDS OF VETERANSThe Institute maintains a written record of a student™s previous edu -cation. This is part of the student™s official transcript, and included on  this is a summary of any prior college-level education. A true copy of a transcript of college-level work at other institutions is maintained as part of the student™s record. The amount of credit granted for prior  training is indicated on the student™s official transcript and, where this  results in the shortening of a required training period in the case of a  veteran, the Veterans Administration is notified. The Institute™s official transcript for each student shows the progress  that student is making at the Institute. There is a record of each course  enrolled in each term with a grade recorded for the course. The total  number of units earned is kept so that the record will show continued  progress toward the degree sought. The final grades are recorded at  the end of each term of the school year, and the accumulative perma -nent record has on it grades for all subjects taken at the Institute. No  General Information35student is allowed to enroll repeatedly in a course and withdraw with -out penalty. If a student enrolls in a course, they are expected to com -plete the course or receive a failing grade unless they withdraw from  the course prior to the deadline for dropping courses. All students must  maintain a minimum load equivalent to 12 quarter hours each term; no student may drop courses that would bring them below this level of  effort. At any time when the student falls below the required number of  units, fails to receive satisfactory grades, or engages in unsatisfactory  conduct, the record is marked to indicate this, and the student is for -bidden to continue at the Institute.The grading system of the Institute is A+ (excellent) to F (failed). An A+ is equivalent to 4.3 and an F to 0.0. A student must maintain a grade-point average of 1.9 in any term in order to be able to enroll in  a successive term at the Institute. A minimum 1.9 overall grade-point average is required for graduation. A student who drops below the  required average (1.9 for a given term) is dismissed and must petition  for reinstatement. A student may be reinstated by the Undergraduate  Academic Standards and Honors Committee and, if so, is required to  earn a 1.9 GPA during the immediately following term. The Veterans  Administration is notified when a veteran is academically dismissed or is making unsatisfactory progress toward a degree. Since the Institute  requires all students to carry a minimum full load that corresponds to  12 quarter hours each term, any student who finishes a term in good standing is considered to have made satisfactory progress. If a student  withdraws from a course before the final date for withdrawal, no grade  is given in that course. The time spent in school counts, however, and  the student may be considered to have not made satisfactory progress  in the event of such withdrawal.In order to withdraw from any course, a student must drop the  course in REGIS or submit a written request to the Registrar™s Office.  The instructor should maintain the date on which the student was last in official attendance in that course. If a student reenrolls in that course  and successfully completes it, that fact will be noted on their official  transcript.VETERANS BENEFITS AND TRANSITION ACT OF 2018 (SECTION 103)Caltech adheres to the requirements of and complies with the Veterans  Benefits and Transition Act of 2018, specifically S2248 PL 115-407  Section 103. This provision was effective August 1, 2019 for any  students who are considered ﬁa covered individualﬂ using ﬁChapter  33: Post 9/11 GI Bill®ﬂ benefits or any participants in ﬁChapter 31: Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment Programﬂ benefits at a pub -lic, private for-profit, or not-for-profit institution regarding unpaid tuition  and fees.Caltech permits any covered individual to attend or participate in  courses during the period beginning on the date on which the individ-ual provides to the educational institution a certificate of eligibility for  entitlement to educational assistance under chapter 31 or 33 of this title.In accordance with S2248 PL 115-407 Section 103 Caltech will not  impose any penalty, including the assessment of late fees, the denial of  Notices and Agreements 36access to classes, libraries, or other Institute facilities, or the require -ment that a covered individual borrow additional funds, on any covered  individual because of the individual™s inability to meet their financial  obligations to the institution due to the delayed disbursement of a pay-ment to be provided by the Secretary under chapter 31 or 33 of this  title.GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans  Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA  is available at the official U.S. government Web site at www.benefits. va.gov/gibill. ACCESS TO STUDENT RECORDSThe Institute maintains educational records for each student that  include name, address, student identification number (including Social  Security number), information on parents, guardian, and spouse, gener -al information on academic status at the Institute, previous school data,  results of standardized admissions examinations, courses previously  taken or being taken, credits, grades, as well as other educational  records. Applicants for financial aid have an additional file holding  those records. The Family Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)  and Caltech policy afford students certain rights as well as establish  limitations with respect to student educational records. These rights  and limitations are as follows: 1.  Caltech permits disclosure of educational records, without con -sent of the student, to Institute officials with legitimate educa -tional interests in them. An Institute official is a person employed  by the Institute in an administrative, supervisory, academic or  research, or support-staff position (including security personnel  and health and diversity center staff), a person or company with  whom the Institute has contracted (such as an attorney, auditor,  consultants, contractors, or collection agent), a person serving on the Board of Trustees, or a student serving on an official  committee, such as a disciplinary or grievance committee, or assisting another Institute official in performing their tasks. An  Institute official has a legitimate educational interest if they need  to review an educational record in order to fulfill their profes -sional responsibility. They are available to the registrar, provost,  president, general counsel, vice president for development  and institute relations, vice president for student affairs, dean  of graduate studies, dean of undergraduate students, director  of financial aid, and faculty of the Institute and their respective  staffs for the normal academic and business purposes of the  Institute. Records involving financial aid are maintained by the  director of financial aid, and are available to the director and  staff, to the dean of graduate studies and staff, to the Faculty  Committee on Scholarships and Financial Aid, and to the Faculty Committee on Graduate Study, for the purpose of granting and  administering the Institute™s financial aid program. Except as  authorized by federal or state law or regulation, none of these  General Information37education records nor any personally-identifiable information  contained therein, other than directory information (see below),  may be made available to anyone else, other than the student, without the consent of the student. Where the student consents  to disclosure of personally-identifiable information from the stu -dent™s education records and Caltech chooses to disclose such  information, if the student so requests, the Institute will provide  the student with a copy of the records disclosed. The Institute  will maintain a record of each request for access to and each  disclosure of personally-identifiable information from the educa -tion records of a student, as required by applicable federal law  or regulation.  2.  Students are allowed access to their educational records as  follows: A student may inspect and review their academic  transcript during normal working hours. To inspect and review  other records, the student must provide a written request to the  registrar or to the director of financial aid or to the dean of grad -uate studies or to the dean of undergraduate students, or their  designees, as appropriate. A mutually-convenient time will be  arranged within 45 days after receipt of the request for the stu -dent to inspect and review the records in their file. At that time  the student may examine all educational records in the file with  the exception of those specifically exempted by Part 99 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations. If circumstances effec -tively prevent the student from exercising their right to review  their education records, the Institute will make other arrange -ments. If a student believes the educational records relating to  the student contain information that is inaccurate, misleading, or in violation of the student™s rights of privacy, the student may  ask the Institute to amend the record. The Institute will decide  whether to amend the records as requested within a reasonable  time after receiving the request. If the registrar, or the director  of financial aid, or the dean of graduate studies, or the dean of undergraduate students, or their designees, decide not to  amend the record as requested, the student will be informed of  the decision and of their right to a hearing. The student will have, on request, an opportunity for a hearing to challenge the content  of the records on the grounds that the information contained in  the records is inaccurate, misleading or in violation of the priva -cy rights of the student. To request a hearing, the student must  submit a written request to the vice president for student affairs  or their designee. The vice president for student affairs or his/her  designee will schedule such a hearing within a reasonable time  after receipt of the request and will notify the student at a time  reasonably in advance of the hearing of its date, time, and place.  The student will be afforded a full and fair opportunity to present  evidence relevant to the issues raised and may be assisted or  represented by individuals of their choice at their own expense,  including an attorney. The decision of the vice president or  designee will be in writing, will be rendered within a reasonable  time after the conclusion of the hearing, and will be final. This Notices and Agreements 38decision will be based solely upon the evidence presented at  the hearing and will include a summary of the evidence and of the reasons for the decision. If, as a result of the hearing, the  Institute decides that the information is inaccurate, misleading, or otherwise in violation of the privacy rights of the student, the Institute will amend the record accordingly, and inform the  student of the amendment in writing. However, if, as a result of  the hearing, the Institute decides that the information is not inac-curate, misleading, or otherwise in violation of the privacy rights of a student, it will inform the student of the right to place in the educational records a statement commenting on the information  in the records and/or setting forth any reasons for disagreeing  with the decision of the Institute. If the Institute places a state-ment in the education records of the student, the Institute will  maintain the statement with the contested part of the record for  as long as the record is maintained and will disclose the state -ment whenever it discloses the portion of the record to which  the statement relates.  3.  The Institute considers the following to be directory information:  a student™s name, UID, addresses (permanent, campus and  local/off-campus, and email), associated telephone listings, ID  photograph, date and place of birth, major field of study, year in  school, current enrollment status, expected date of graduation,  name of academic adviser, participation in officially recognized  activities and sports, weight and height if a member of an ath-letic team, dates of attendance, degrees and awards received,  thesis title, hometown, and most recently attended educational  agency or institution. Directory information may be made avail -able to requestors at the Institute™s discretion. Any student may,  however, have part or all of this information withheld by notifying  the registrar in writing. That information will then be withheld  for the balance of that academic year. If the information is to be  withheld in subsequent years, new requests must be filed.  4.  A student will not be required to waive any rights regarding  access to educational records. However, a student may volun -tarily waive in writing right of access to confidential statements made by third parties respecting admission to educational agen -cies or institutions, applications for employment, or the receipt  of an honor or honorary recognition. In case of waiver, the  confidential statements will be used solely for the purposes for which they were specifically intended, and the student will, upon  request, be notified of the names of all persons making such  confidential statements. If a student should desire to waive right  of access, may contact the registrar for more information.  5.  The Institute reserves the right to destroy from time to time any  and all educational records that it maintains on a student, except  to the extent that the law requires their maintenance for a lon -ger period of time. However, where access to records has been  requested, no destruction of those records will be allowed to  take place until such access has been granted or denied.6.  Students who believe their rights under FERPA may have been  General Information39violated may file a complaint with the Family Policy Compliance Office, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue SW,  Washington D.C. 20202-4605. Transcripts of Records  A student, or former student, may request that official transcripts of  their records be forwarded to designated institutions or individuals.  Requests should be filed at the Registrar™s Office at least five days  before the date on which the transcripts are to be mailed. PARENT, GUARDIAN, AND EMERGENCY CONTACT  NOTIFICATION POLICY Caltech understands and supports a student™s right to confidentiality  regarding educational records1 as well as matters related to a student™s  experience at the Institute. Most communications from Caltech regard -ing academics, health and safety, advising, enrollment, and policies  are directed only to students. However, the Institute does encourage  students to share important information with their parent(s) or guard -ian. Subject to the allowable exceptions under FERPA, there may be  circumstances under which a Caltech administrator makes the determi -nation that notification to parent(s) or a guardian is indicated, and notifi -cation may be made without a student™s consent. In most cases, when  a Caltech administrator determines that involving parent(s) or guardian  is necessary, the student will be given an opportunity to make contact  in advance of the administrator™s communication. Administrators will  consider any relevant information which may indicate that notification  to parent(s) or guardian may not be appropriate based on individu -al circumstances. The Institute expects all students to designate an  emergency contact who is a parent or guardian or other family member  who may be notified in order to address a health or safety emergency,  and who is in a position to make decisions on the student™s behalf in  the case of a medical emergency. An alternate emergency contact also  may be identified for other purposes.Situations that may warrant the involvement of a student™s, parent(s),  guardian, or emergency contact may include, but are not limited to: 1. Concerns about a student under the age of 18. Caltech administrators will initiate communication with the parent(s) or guardian of a minor student in the cases described  below, as well as any other concerns about a minor student that  may benefit from collaboration with the student™s support sys -tem.2. Change in enrollment or status of an undergraduate student. A change in the enrollment status of an undergraduate student  may occur as a result of disciplinary action, unsatisfactory aca -demic progress, or other factors. If an undergraduate student  is separated from the Institute, the parent(s) or guardian will be  notified by mail at the permanent address on file.  3. Medical emergencies. State law prohibits health care professionals from disclosing  Notices and Agreements 40medical information to the parents or guardian of a student with -out the student™s explicit consent. In the event a student is inca -pacitated, unable to communicate, or otherwise cannot make decisions on their own behalf, the Institute will first cooperate with medical providers and then notify the emergency contact,  parent(s) or guardian on file as soon as possible.  4. Unexplained absence from campus.  Caltech has established a policy to assist in locating Caltech students living in Caltech campus housing when Caltech has determined a student to be missing. The key components of this policy are as follows: Ł Designation of Confidential Contact.  Students have the option of identifying an individual to be contacted by Caltech within 24 hours after the time the student has been determined to be missing (missing person contact). This information will be accessible only to authorized campus officials and may not be  disclosed except to law enforcement personnel in a missing per -son™s investigation. If a student chooses not to provide a confi -dential contact and is deemed to be missing, Caltech will notify the student™s emergency contact or parent. Ł Reporting and Investigation. Any individual who believes a stu-dent living in on campus housing may be missing should imme-diately contact Caltech Campus Security. Once Caltech receives  a missing student report, Security will notify the Vice President  for Student Affairs, the Deans, the AVP for Student Affairs and  Residential Experience and the Director of Housing. Upon noti -fication that any student may be missing, Caltech will initiate an investigation. If a student is determined to have been missing for twenty-four (24) hours and has not returned to campus, Caltech  will notify the appropriate law enforcement agency and initiate  other notifications as provided below. Ł Notification Procedures.  A student™s missing person contact  will be notified within 24 hours of a determination by Caltech that the student is missing.  If no missing person contact has been designated, the student™s emergency contact will be noti -fied.  If the student is under 18 years of age and not an eman-cipated individual, Caltech is also required to notify a custodial  parent or guardian within 24 hours of the determination that the  student is missing.5. Significant disruption to the campus community.  The emergency contact, parent(s) or guardian of a student may  be notified if the student is behaving in a way that is substan-tially disruptive to the campus community, there is reason to  believe the student is at risk of harming themselves or others, or is placed under arrest or charged with a crime related to conduct  on campus.6. Repeated or flagrant violations of the Substance Abuse Policy.  Caltech administrators may contact parent(s) or guardian if a  student under the age of 21 is found responsible for serious or  repeated violations of Institute policy related to the possession,  use or distribution of alcohol or drugs. Consideration in these General Information41situations will be given to the following conditions: the violation involved harm or threat of harm to self, others or property; the  violation involved an arrest in which the student was taken into  custody; the violation resulted in or could result in the student  being suspended and/or removed from an Institute residence;  the student has shown a pattern of violations; the student  required urgent medical intervention as a result of consumption  of alcohol and/or drugs.7. Student death. In the event of a student death, Caltech administrators will coop-erate with law enforcement, the coroner, medical personnel, and  any other relevant officials who will provide official notification to  the deceased student™s next of kin. There may be additional, unforeseen circumstances when we believe  it is in the best interest of the student to notify a parent or guardian.  We reserve the right to act in such cases on our own best judgment,  framed within the approach to emergency contact and parental/guard -ian notification stated above.1The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) (20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 99) ACCREDITATIONS AND AUTHORIZATIONS The California Institute of Technology is accredited by the WASC Senior  College and University Commission (WSCUC), 985 Atlantic Ave., Ste.  100, Alameda, CA 94501; (510) 748-9001. In addition, the Institute is authorized by the California State Department of Education, Office of  Private Postsecondary Education, to operate as a private postsecond-ary educational institution and, by the same agency, to train veterans in  the programs of the Veterans Administration.   The Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, Inc. (111  Market Place, Suite 1050, Baltimore, MD 21202-4012; 410-347-7700),  has accredited Caltech™s B.S. program in mechanical engineering.  Further, the Committee on Professional Training of the American  Chemical Society has approved Caltech™s B.S. program in chemistry. The documents describing these accreditations and authorizations  are on file and may be inspected in the Registrar™s Office and the  Provost™s Office; the office of the Division of Engineering and Applied  Science also has the documentation for ABET. WSCUC Accreditation and Distance Learning during the COVID-19  Pandemic Following guidance from the U.S. Department of Education, WSCUC- accredited institutions that make distance learning arrangements in  order to accommodate students whose participation is affected by the  COVID-19 pandemic are not required to seek approval or notify the  Commission. This applies to institutions who implement distance learn -ing for any term that begins by December 31, 2020.Notices and Agreements 42STUDENT PROBLEM RESOLUTION PROCESSCaltech provides a variety of routes, most of them informal, by which  students may bring complaints, which do not fall within the jurisdiction of other Policies or the Honor System, for consideration and reso -lution. For example, in academic matters, students may begin with faculty-student conversations that may extend to the deans, the option representatives, the division chairs, the registrar, or to various com -mittees having faculty and student members. Non-academic matters can be dealt with informally by student leaders, resident associates,  residential life coordinators, deans, and other student affairs offices.  The Graduate Student Council (GSC) and the Associated Students of the California Institute of Technology (ASCIT) may become involved in  some complaints, and sometimes ad hoc groups are formed to make  recommendations.   The Problem-Resolution Process (Process) is intended to deal with  complaints by currently enrolled students for which reasonable efforts by  the available informal routes have not led to an acceptable resolution.   The first step in this Process is for the student to consult with the  appropriate deans. One of the deans will then determine if the issue  falls under this Process and, if appropriate, may appoint a facilitator  to help resolve the issue. If the student™s issue involves a decision or  action of a dean, the vice president for student affairs or designee may  appoint a facilitator to help resolve the issue.  A facilitator will assist the student in trying to work out the problem.  If the student is not satisfied with the results, the student may file a  written notice of appeal to the vice president for student affairs or their  designee. The decision of the vice president or designee is final.  If a student has a complaint about Caltech™s compliance with aca -demic program quality and accrediting standards that they believe  warrants further attention after exhausting the steps outlined above, they may contact the WASC Senior College and University Commission  (WSCUC) at www.wscuc.org/comments. WASC is the academic  accrediting body for Caltech. An individual may contact the Bureau  for Private Postsecondary Education (BPPE) for review of a com -plaint. BPPE may be contacted at 2535 Capitol Oaks Drive, Suite 400, Sacramento, CA 95833, website: www.bppe.ca.gov; telephone: (916)  431-6959; fax: (916) 263-1897. Prospective students may contact  WASC or the BPPE with complaints as well. STUDENT PATENT AND COMPUTER  SOFTWARE AGREEMENT The California Institute of Technology (Caltech) has a responsibility to see  that inventions and copyrightable materials (including software) developed  in connection with Caltech be used for the public benefit, and be con-sistent with Caltech™s contractual obligations. In view of the patent and  copyright policies of Caltech in force on this date and as may from time  to time be amended, and my use of and access to Caltech facilities and  equipment, I agree to the following: Caltech retains all rights in inventions and computer software I generate  as a student at the Caltech campus, Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and  General Information43other facilities owned or managed by Caltech, with the following excep-tions:1.  When I generate copyrightable computer software or other written  work at Caltech in connection with my enrollment in Caltech™s  educational program, such as in course work, homework, theses  and publications, I understand that I will retain ownership of copy -rights to these works, and I hereby grant to Caltech an irrevocable  royalty-free nonexclusive license to use such computer software  and written work for educational and research purposes, including  the right to grant sublicenses. If the work is generated at JPL or  any Caltech owned or managed facility, I also hereby grant to the  United States Government (ﬁGovernmentﬂ) a royalty-free, nonex -clusive license to use such computer software and written work for  purposes for or on behalf of the Government, to the extent Caltech  or the Government requires such a license. 2.   When I make inventions, write computer software or other  written work entirely on my own time, without using Caltech™s  equipment or facilities (other than incidental use of electronic  information resources as is permitted under Caltech policy), and  without using Caltech funds, I retain ownership of those inven -tions, software and written work. I agree to assign, and hereby do assign, to Caltech all inventions and  copyrightable materials that I develop with the use of funds administered  by Caltech, or in the course of my duties at or for Caltech, including JPL,  or with use of other facilities owned or managed by Caltech, apart from  those for which I retain rights under numbered paragraphs 1 and 2 of this  agreement, and all copyrights, patent applications and patents relating to  those inventions and copyrightable materials.I agree to execute all papers required to apply for, obtain, maintain,  issue and enforce the assigned copyright registrations, patents and appli -cations; and to provide reasonable assistance regarding those copyrights,  patents and patent applications, including testifying in any related patent  office proceeding, dispute or litigation. Expenses for the copyrights and  patent applications, and for the assistance set forth in the preceding sen -tence, shall be borne entirely by Caltech. I agree to notify Caltech promptly of all such assigned inventions or  copyrightable materials.I understand that if Caltech receives funds from the licensing of the  assigned copyrightable materials or patents in excess of unreimbursed  expenses associated with obtaining, maintaining and enforcing those  copyrights and patents, I will share in these funds according to the estab -lished Caltech policy, procedures and practice in effect on the date that  the patent application is filed or the computer software is completed, in  the same manner as a member of the academic staff and employees. I agree to notify Caltech of any funding of which I am aware that  may have supported an assigned invention described in the preceding  paragraphs. This is to ensure Caltech™s compliance with its obligations,  including the provisions of the Federal Bayh-Dole Act and implementing  regulations. For work done at JPL, I agree to have all scientific and techni -Noticies and Agreements 44cal publications reviewed, pursuant to JPL policy, prior to public release to  ensure compliance with U.S. export control laws. I understand that Caltech relies on this agreement when it enters into  contracts with others and obligates itself with respect to inventions and  computer software developed at Caltech. Revised 03-23-2015STUDENT RETENTION AND PERSISTENCE RATES Most undergraduates enter Caltech at the freshman level. Of the 235  freshmen enrolled during the 2019-20 academic year, 220 reenrolled in  the first term of the 2020-21 academic year and are progressing, yielding  a persistence rate* of 94 percent after all allowable exclusions. Of the 226  freshmen enrolled during the 2014-15 academic year, 194 graduated by  June 2020, yielding a graduation rate* for this group of 86 percent after  allowable exclusions.At the graduate level, most students enter Caltech to pursue either the  degree of Master of Science or Doctor of Philosophy or, occasionally, both.  Of the 248 entering graduate students enrolled in a Ph.D. program during  the 2019-20 academic year, 238 reenrolled in the first term of the 2020-21  academic year and are making satisfactory academic progress, resulting  in a persistence rate* of 96 percent. Of the 21 entering graduate students  enrolled in M.S. programs during the 2019-20 academic year, 11 earned a  terminal M.S. degree within one year. * Both persistence and retention were impacted by the COVID-19 pan -demicSTUDENT EVENTSCaltech is committed to providing its students, faculty and staff with  an environment that promotes safe and responsible social interaction.  Caltech recognizes that student activities are an important part of cam -pus life. Students are required to follow Event Planning Procedures:  spa.caltech.edu.CODE OF CONDUCTTHE CALTECH COMMUNITY™S STATEMENT  ON ETHICAL CONDUCTWe are all part of the Caltech community whether we are located on cam -pus, at JPL, at observatories or anywhere else in the universe. As mem -bers of the Caltech community, we expect that each of us will embody the  high standards that have gained Caltech its worldwide reputation. In 2012,  members representing the Caltech community began a conversation on  ethical conduct. These discussions focused on the overarching values of  our community. As a result of these discussions, we describe, in detail,  these values in 11 short statements.General Information451. Strive for Excellence We commit to excellence in all things in process as well as out -comes, knowing that only the process is truly under our control.  Responsibility and accountability are the hallmarks of our  community.  2. Act with Integrity We uphold integrity in all we do.  We hold ourselves accountable for the outcomes of our actions.  3. Encourage Open, Honest, and Respectful DiscourseWe encourage open, honest, and respectful discourse from and  between all members of the community, regardless of position,  length of service, or role.  We treat one another with civility.  4. Respect and Promote Freedom of Inquiry We encourage curiosity in research, scholarship, and exploration,  and we create the conditions where inquiry can flourish.  5. Foster a Supportive and Diverse Community Every member of the Caltech community treats one another with  dignity and respect.  We value different perspectives, opinions, and ideas.  We enable one another™s excellence.  We support the health and wellness of all community members.  6. Commit to Education The opportunity for excellence in education exists at all levels and  in formal and informal ways that benefit students, employees, and  members of our community.  We are committed to being great educatorsŠas leaders, mentors,  and friendsŠnot only of our students, but also of our community,  our peers and colleagues, and ourselves. 7. Conduct Work Responsibly  We fulfill the obligations of our role.  We are responsible stewards of the Institute resources entrusted to  us, including the environment, equipment and facilities, money and  people. We respect the environment and are conscious of our impact.  8. Protect the Interests of Those Who Place Their Trust in Us  We are forthright with our students, their parents, employees, man -agers, and people who rely on us for leadership and accountability  at all levels. We hold ourselves to the highest standards of integrity in peer  reviews, scientific evaluations, and recommendations.  We represent ourselves accurately and factually to our peers, spon -sors, and the general public. We are open and honest in all our dealings with the government,  Code of Conduct46external agencies, taxpayers, and donors.  We honor our obligations to donors and sponsors.  9. Provide and Maintain a Safe Environment for Learning and Working   We create, provide, and maintain a safe environment for ourselves  and for others. We foster the physical, mental, and emotional well-being of our  community.  10. Obey the Law and Comply with Institutional PoliciesWe are scrupulous in all business dealings. We are truthful, forthright and accurate when preparing all books,  records, documents, reports, and publications. We adhere to local, state, and federal laws and regulations. We deal honestly with government in all matters.  11. Represent CaltechWe represent Caltech whether we are based on campus, at JPL,  our observatories, or anywhere else in the world. We are ambassadors and advocates, embodying the high stan -dards that we set for ourselves and to which we are held by others. We are committed to the Institute and its mission recognizing that  our actions as individuals reflect on Caltech. As members of the Caltech community, we embrace the letter and  the spirit of these principles. Each member is personally responsible for  incorporating these principles into their own actions and is encouraged  to speak up if they, in good faith, believe the Institute or any individual is  falling short of living up to them. We are proud of Caltech and to share the  community™s commitment to these values. INSTITUTE POLICIESACCEPTABLE USE OF ELECTRONIC  INFORMATION RESOURCES Caltech provides electronic information resources (including, but not  limited to, computers, computer accounts and services, networks, software, electronic mail services, electronic information sources, video  and voice services, servers, websites, mobile devices, and related  services) to assist members of the Caltech community in the pursuit of education and research. This policy, in conjunction with other appli -cable Caltech policies, sets forth the acceptable use of all electronic  information resources owned or managed by Caltech (including those  operated by third parties for Caltech, such as accounts issued by  third-party cloud services for Caltech) (collectively, ﬁCaltech IT resourc -esﬂ) and describes the rights and responsibilities of Caltech and faculty,  staff, students, and other members of or visitors to the Caltech com -munity with respect to the use of these resources. Caltech IT resources are intended to be used to carry out the legit -imate business of Caltech, although some incidental personal use is General Information47permitted. Faculty, staff, students, and other members of or visitors to  the Caltech community (ﬁusersﬂ) who use Caltech™s electronic infor -mation resources should be guided by the Caltech Code of Conduct.  Passwords and other authentication mechanisms or devices issued to  users are for their use only and are not to be shared with others. Users  assume responsibility for the appropriate use of Caltech IT resources  and agree to comply with all relevant Caltech policies and all applicable  local, state, and federal laws. Examples of inappropriate or unautho -rized use of Caltech IT resources include: sending a communication or using electronic information  resources, including websites that illegally discriminate against,  harass, defame, or threaten individuals or organizations; engaging in illegal conduct or conduct that violates Caltech pol-icy;destruction of, damage to, or malicious tampering with equip-ment, software, or data belonging to others; disruption, interception, or unauthorized monitoring of electronic  communications;interference with use of Caltech systems; violations of computer security systems;unauthorized use of accounts, access codes, or identification numbers;use that intentionally impedes the legitimate computing activities of others;use for commercial purposes; use for political or lobbying activity that jeopardizes Caltech™s  tax-exempt status and violates Caltech policy;violation of copyrights, software license agreements, patent  protections and authorizations, or protections on proprietary or  confidential information;violation of copyright laws by downloading and sharing copy-righted files;unauthorized use of Caltech™s trademarks; violations of privacy;academic dishonesty;sending chain mail, spam, or other junk messages;fraudulent activity using Caltech IT resources;  downloading, viewing, and/or sharing of materials in violation of Caltech™s policies regarding Unlawful Harassment and Sex- and  Gender-Based Misconduct; unauthorized intrusion into computer systems to alter or destroy  data or computer applications (e.g., hacking or cracking); unauthorized security testing or scanning of Caltech IT resources  or of another entity; orsending communications that attempt to hide the identity of the sender or represent the sender as someone else.  Caltech will apply this policy consistent with applicable requirements  under the laws and regulations governing Caltech™s operations. This policy  will not be construed or applied in a manner that improperly interferes with  employees™ rights under the National Labor Relations Act.Institute Policies48Caltech IT resources are Caltech property or licensed by Caltech for  Caltech™s use. Users of Caltech IT resources should not have an expec -tation of privacy with respect to their use of these resources or any of  the data, files, or other records generated by, stored, or maintained on  them. For cybersecurity and other lawful purposes, Caltech may collect, store, and analyze information on both of the following: (1) any and all  use of Caltech™s electronic information resources and (2) any data or  communications transmitted to or from, received or printed from, or  created, stored, accessed, or recorded on Caltech™s electronic infor -mation resources. This is true regardless of the labeling of the data, the  use of encryption, the deletion of the data or communications, or any other factor.   Password capabilities and other authentication measures are pro -vided to users in order to safeguard electronic messages, data, files,  and other records (including computer files and records, electronic  mail, and voicemail) from unauthorized use. These safeguards are not  intended to provide confidentiality from Caltech monitoring with respect  to personal messages or files stored on electronic information resourc -es owned and managed by Caltech.While Caltech does not routinely examine the content of electronic  mail messages or otherwise monitor individual usage, it does routinely  monitor the normal operation of computing and networking resources,  including network activity patterns, system logs, general and individual  usage patterns, and other indicia necessary to ensure the integrity and  stability of its electronic information resources. Caltech will investigate suspected abuse, misuse, or compromise of  its resources, systems, and services. Any user found to have violated  this policy may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including loss of administrative rights or network/system access and termination of employment or admission to the Caltech community. Caltech retains the right to inspect, review, or retain the content of  electronic messages or other data, files, or records generated, stored,  or maintained on Caltech IT resources at any time without prior notifi -cation. Any such action will be taken for reasons Caltech, within its dis -cretion, deems to be legitimate. These legitimate reasons may include,  but are not limited to, responding to lawful subpoenas or court orders;  investigating misconduct (including research misconduct); determining  compliance with Caltech policies and the law; and locating electronic  messages, data, files, or other records related to these purposes. Users  must therefore understand that any electronic messages, data, files,  and other records generated by, stored, or maintained on Caltech IT  resources may be electronically accessed, reconstructed, or retrieved  by Caltech even after they have been deleted.Caltech personnel who wish to access the content of electronic  mail, data, files, or other records generated, stored, or maintained by  any user must request authorization as follows: (1) from the provost  for any situations that require access to electronic material associated  with faculty and other academic personnel; (2) from the vice president  for administration and chief financial officer for staff and postdoctor -al scholars at campus or the JPL director for human resources for  General Information49employees and postdoctoral scholars at JPL; (3) from the vice presi -dent for student affairs for students; or (4) from the general counsel for  the purposes of complying with legal processes and requirements or  to preserve user electronic information for possible subsequent access  in accordance with this policy. In all cases, the Office of the General  Counsel should be consulted prior to deciding on whether to grant access. In the case of a time-critical matter, if the authorizing official is  unavailable for a timely response, the general counsel may authorize  access. Users of Caltech IT resources are advised that some authoriza -tions already have been granted. For example, the Caltech information  security team has certain authority to monitor Caltech IT resources for  cybersecurity purposes.In conclusion, the use of Caltech electronic information resources is  a privilege, not a right, and Caltech may revoke this privilege or decline  to extend this privilege at any time. Suspected illegal acts involving Caltech electronic information  resources may be reported to governmental authorities and may result  in prosecution by those authorities. Any questions concerning the  appropriate use of any of Caltech™s electronic information resources or  relevant Caltech policies should be directed to the provost, the general  counsel, the chief information officer, the associate vice president for  human resources, the JPL director for human resources, the dean of  undergraduate students, or the dean of graduate studies.  Related Policies: Nondiscrimination and Equal Employment Opportunity Policy Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy   Unlawful Harassment Policy   COMPLIANCE WITH EXPORT LAWS AND REGULATIONS The mission of the California Institute of Technology is to expand  human knowledge and benefit society through research integrated with  education.  We investigate the most challenging, fundamental problems  in science and technology in a singularly collegial, interdisciplinary  atmosphere, while educating outstanding students to become creative  members of society. Export control laws and regulations as referred to in this Policy include  a number of federal laws and regulations that impact an export or import  transaction such as those of the Departments of State, Commerce,  Treasury, Defense, Energy and U.S. Customs.  These laws have existed for  many years, however, the events of September 11, 2001 and subsequent  events around the world have pushed national security concerns to the  forefront.  The U.S. government has responded to global security concerns  by tightening the export control regulations that govern the transfer of U.S.  strategic technology for national security and foreign policy reasons and in  furtherance of economic objectives.  The export control laws are intended to control the transfer of  sensitive information or goods to individuals, entities or countries of Institute Policies50concern. The laws impose restrictions dependent on the type of infor -mation or goods and the identity of the foreign persons and entities.  The regulations contain a fundamental research exclusion and specific  university exemptions that allow most of the research activities being  performed at U.S. universities to be carried out without the need of export licenses or other restrictions, subject to certain conditions.   The fundamental research exclusion, as defined in the U.S. export  regulations, applies to basic and applied research in science and engi -neering performed by universities, so long as that research is carried  out openly and without restrictions on publication or access to or dis -semination of the research results.  Caltech is an institution of higher  learning conducting fundamental research in science and engineer -ing.  While the fundamental research exclusion applies to much of the  research carried out at Caltech, we are not fully relieved of our respon -sibility to comply with the export control regulations.   The National Policy on Transfer of Scientific, Technical and  Engineering Information, i.e., Presidential National Security Decision  Directive 189 (NSDD 189) recognizes the important contributions that  U.S. universities make in science and engineering that allow our nation to remain innovative and competitive.  This National Policy provides the  framework for the fundamental research exclusion.  The fundamental research exclusion applies only to research con -ducted in the United States. This exclusion allows most of the activities conducted at Caltech to be performed without the need for an export license.  However, there are certain activities and information that are  not covered by the fundamental research exclusion and remain subject  to the export control laws and regulations.  Examples of activities not covered by the fundamental research  exclusion are:  1. Receipt by Caltech of third-party export controlled or other  restricted information (e.g., information with restrictive marking  language) which requires that appropriate measures be taken to  ensure that the information is properly safeguarded from unau -thorized transfers to foreign persons; 2. Under certain conditions, the disclosure of specific information  and the provision of specific types of services to foreign persons  (non-U.S. citizens, non-legal permanent residents, or non-U.S.  legal entities) inside the United States (ﬁdeemed exportsﬂ), e.g. proprietary data, results of research where we have accepted  restrictions on dissemination or participation of foreign nationals; 3. Travel abroad:  Engaging in  activities subject to the export reg -ulations with persons and entities abroad such as traveling with  export controlled information on electronic devices; release or  disclosures of restricted US technology to foreign persons; travel  to sanctioned or embargoed countries; 4. The export of controlled items and information outside the  United States including:  controlled hardware, software and  technology (e.g., physical and non-tangible exports; emails, backing up controlled information outside the US); and  5. Financial transactions or other dealings involving prohibited par -ties or sanctioned countries.General Information51The export control laws and regulations may apply to research activ -ities whether or not they are funded by grants or contracts.   The export control laws are administered by the U.S. Department of  Commerce through its Export Administration Regulations (EAR Œ dual- use items), the U.S. Department of State through its International Traffic  in Arms Regulations (ITAR Œ space and military items), and the U.S.  Department of Treasury through its Office of Foreign Assets Control  (OFAC Œ economic and trade sanctions).  These laws control the condi -tions under which certain information, technologies, and commodities can be transmitted overseas to anyone, including U.S. citizens, or to a foreign person on U.S. soil.  Caltech is committed to comply fully with  these federal laws and regulations.    Caltech takes its commitment to openness in research very seri -ously. Caltech™s policy, as set forth in the Faculty Handbook, does not  allow acceptance of any government contract or grant that impinges  on Caltech™s ability to freely publish and otherwise disseminate the  results of its research.  The transfer of export controlled information  or items requires added levels of security, safeguarding responsibil -ities and, in some instances, government authorization.  For these  reasons, research activities in which students will be provided with  export-controlled technology (including technical data, software or  items) with ITAR or high EAR (e.g., 500- and 600-series Export Control  Classification Number*) controls or licensing requirements, must be for -mally approved by the Office of the Provost. To that end, Caltech has established an Export Compliance Office  and has appointed a Director for Export Compliance who also functions  as Caltech™s Empowered Official.  The Empowered Official is the per -son who has legal authority to sign export control license applications  and other requests for export approval on behalf of Caltech, and is the  person responsible for developing and implementing export compliance  programs, campus procedures, awareness programs for faculty and  training programs for staff.    Caltech expects all faculty and staff to comply fully with all appli -cable export control laws and regulations.  (The Jet Propulsion  Laboratory, a federally funded research and development center, has  a separate Export Compliance Policy.) Noncompliance may result in  violations that can subject both the individual and Caltech to civil sanc-tions and criminal penalties.It is the responsibility of Caltech faculty and staff to ensure Caltech™s  compliance with this policy.  The Director for Export Compliance has been designated as the  primary contact for export control issues. For more information or for  questions, please contact:Adilia F. Koch, Director for Export Compliance, (626) 395-4469 or the  Export Compliance Office staff at (626) 395-2641 or export@caltech. edu.    * Export Control Classification Numbers (ECCNs) are described on the Department of  Commerce™s website here: https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/licensing/commerce-con -trol-list-classification/export-control-classification-number-eccn.  Institute Policies52CONFLICTS OF INTEREST POLICY1.0  Policy The mission of Caltech is to expand human knowledge and benefit society through research integrated with education. In pursuit of this  mission, Caltech adheres to the Code of Conduct comprising its code  of conduct and strives for the highest level of integrity and public con-fidence. Caltech™s integrity rests on the personal integrity of each of us  who is called upon to act on behalf of Caltech. Caltech is committed to ensuring that decisions made on its behalf reflect the highest ethical  standards and that its research and instruction remain a rigorous and  open inquiry, unencumbered by conflicts of interest, real or perceived,  that might affect the sound judgment of its trustees, officers, senior  management, faculty, students, postdoctoral scholars, visitors and  staff. Each of us, therefore, is responsible for identifying and resolving  conflicts between personal and institutional interests. We each must  act in the best interests of Caltech and refrain from taking part in any  transaction where we do not believe in good faith that we can act  impartially. Individual conflicts of interest may affect Caltech™s trustees, officers,  faculty, postdoctoral scholars, visitors or staff. An individual conflict  of interest is a situation that may compromise an individual™s profes -sional judgment in carrying out Institute business due to an external  relationship that directly or indirectly affects the interest of the indi -vidual or an immediate family member. Each situation that presents a  potential for conflict of interest must be fully disclosed to Caltech and  managed or eliminated before moving forward. Conflicts of interest  also include conflicts of commitment, which are situations in which  external activities, either paid or unpaid, interfere with an employee™s  primary obligation and commitment to Caltech. While everyone should take care to avoid conflicts of commitment, there are special consider -ations, including disclosures, that apply to those performing federally  sponsored research at Caltech. Federal sponsors have an interest in  ensuring that the researchers supported on their awards are not over  committed. The Division Chairs and the Office of Research Compliance  serve as resources to researchers who have questions concerning  whether particular activities they are considering may pose a conflict of  commitment. Faculty, postdocs, visiting researchers and research staff  are expected to comply with this policy and are required to complete  Caltech™s Financial Interest and Commitment Disclosure Form within 30  days of hire and on an annual basis, and to submit changes or addi -tions within 30 days of a new interest, activity, or change.  In academic research, the term conflict of interest refers especially  to situations in which financial or other personal considerations may compromise, or may have the appearance of compromising, an investi -gator™s professional judgment in conducting or reporting research. The  bias can affect collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, hiring of  staff, and procurement of materials, sharing of results, choice of proto -col, and the use of statistical methods. Conflicts of interest can affect  all scholarly fields.General Information53 Caltech has established its conflict of interest policies and proce -dures that apply to all Caltech employees, including faculty, to ensure  compliance with Caltech™s ethical standards as well as with the laws,  rules, and regulations that govern Institute activities, while fostering and  sustaining an environment of openness and integrity. 2.0  Individual Conflicts of Interest The broad principles in this policy encompass a variety of situations,  many of which do not fall into patterns for which specific guidelines  may be established. Conflicts of interest inevitably arise from time to  time in everyday business life; some may appear to be inconsequential or may even be advantageous to Caltech. It is important, however, that  all employees make timely disclosure of any such conflict of interest.  Each employee should apply their sense of integrity and common sense to disclose any circumstances that are, may become, or may  give the appearance of a possible conflict of interest. Supplementing  this broad policy statement are the following rules to be observed on  specific matters:2.1 Each employee has a duty to act in the best interest of Caltech  and avoid actions that would call into question the integrity of the employee or Caltech. 2.2 An employee who has directly or through family or business con -nections, a material interest in suppliers of goods or services, or  an interest in contractors or potential contractors with Caltech,  should not act on behalf of Caltech in any transaction involving that interest. No employee should participate in the selection,  award, or administration of a contract with any party with whom  they are negotiating regarding potential employment or any  arrangement concerning potential employment.  2.3 An employee should avoid outside activity involving obligations that may conflict or appear to conflict with Institute interests,  including its interest in the employee™s full- or part-time services  (i.e. a conflict of commitment). Activities to disclose include, but are not limited to, paid or unpaid directorships, external  academic appointments, editorial positions, service on advisory boards, consulting or similar arrangements, and other outside  employment. Campus and JPL staff and postdoctoral scholars  are required to obtain approval prior to engaging in outside  activities. Campus and JPL staff and postdoctoral scholars must  complete the Request for Outside Activity form as required in  Personnel Memorandum PM 9-3.2.4 To avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest, an employee  should provide full disclosure of any business or financial enter -prise or activity in which they are involved that might influence,  or might appear to influence, their official decisions or actions on  Caltech matters. 2.5 An employee should refrain from personal activities that include,  but are not limited to, the purchase or sale of securities, real  property, or other goods or services in which they could use or  might appear to have the opportunity to use, for personal gain, Institute Policies54confidential information or special knowledge gained as a result  of their relationship with Caltech.  2.6 An employee should refrain from unauthorized disclosure of non -public information concerning Caltech. Additionally, an employee  should not use nonpublic information accessed through the per -formance of a government contract for personal gain. 2.7 No employee should make unauthorized use of Caltech resources for their personal benefit or for the benefit of any  other person. Incidental personal use of resources is autho -rized by Caltech. See Acceptable Use of Electronic Information  Resources Policy and JPL Rules for requirements at JPL. 2.8 It is sound practice to discourage gifts and favors from people  with whom Caltech has a business relationship. Personal gifts of  more than nominal value should be tactfully declined or returned  to avoid any appearance or suggestion of improper influence.  Any employee involved in awarding or administering contracts  using federal or other government funds should keep in mind  that state and federal law contain prohibitions against soliciting  or accepting gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors or potential contractors.  2.9 Any employee doing business on behalf of Caltech with specific vendors should refrain from participating going on leisure trips  with representatives of those vendors. Such trips are not appro -priate, even when a staff employee pays a fee to the vendor to  participate in such trips. 2.10 No employee should act in any Institute matter involving a  member of their immediate family including, but not limited to,  matters affecting family members™ employment or evaluation or  advancement in Caltech. Immediate family includes an employ-ee™s spouse or domestic partner and children. The employment  of relatives as that term is defined in Personnel Memorandum  (PM 9), is subject to the conditions and restrictions described  in PM 9, including the requirement to complete the Nepotism  Evaluation process whenever a relative of an employee is  considered for employment in the same organization as the  employee.Any employee who believes that their conduct or activities may or may appear to conflict with these guidelines or activities or otherwise create a conflict of interest, should make an appropriate disclosure.  You may also report possible conflicts of interest by calling the Campus  Hotline at (626) 395-8787 or submitting a hotline form. JPL employees should consult Laboratory requirements, and seek guidance and/or  report possible conflicts of interest by contacting the JPL Ethics Office. 3.0  Additional Faculty ResponsibilitiesIt is acknowledged that, in their wider roles as academicians and pro -fessionals, the faculty may be subject to conflicts of interest that are  not necessarily financial and that are not within the scope of a policy  that is designed to address conflicts of interest in the employer-em -ployee setting. For example, this policy is not designed to address  conflicts that may be encountered in service to a professional society.  General Information55Other activities not covered by this policy are best handled within  the ethical guidelines established by the Faculty Handbook. Faculty members must be aware of potential conflicts to ensure an open and  productive environment for research and teaching. Conflicts of interest  may arise when faculty members have the opportunity to influence Caltech™s business decisions or when outside relationships may or  may appear to compromise the integrity of decisions made as teachers  and researchers. A faculty member™s general commitment to Caltech  requires that members perform their responsibilities to Caltech and  appropriately use their own judgment in deciding whether to engage  in a variety of extramural activities, within the confines set forth in the Faculty Handbook. As a result, Caltech relies on its faculty to be alert  to the possible effect of outside activities on the integrity of their deci -sions and on their ability to fulfill their obligations to Caltech and to fed-eral and private research sponsors. Accordingly, in addition to the con -flict rules set forth above, the following guidance is provided for faculty: 3.1 Disclosure is imperative if the faculty member directs students  in a research area and, as a result, the faculty member intends  to realize financial gain. An example is a research area within the  ambit of a business in which the faculty member has a signifi-cant ownership interest or which employs the faculty member  as a consultant. Any involvement of undergraduates, graduate  students, or postdoctoral scholars in the outside professional  activities of the faculty member directing the student™s research  must be specifically approved in advance by the division chair.  The student or postdoctoral scholar must also sign the written disclosure to signify understanding of the issues involved.  3.2 Disclosure is mandatory if the faculty member has a significant  interest in a business under circumstances that link the fortunes  of the business to the faculty member™s research.  3.3 Disclosure is mandatory if the faculty member is to receive spon -sored support for research from a business for which the faculty  member is a consultant, or in which the faculty member has a significant financial interest. 4.0  Conflict of Interest Requirements Imposed by Federal Sponsors Federal sponsors, including National Science Foundation (NSF) and Public Health Service (PHS), have issued specific rules regarding the  disclosure of significant financial interests and the management of  financial conflicts of interest as a condition for submitting propos -als and accepting awards of financial support from these agencies.  Members of the Caltech community proposing or working on any  activity funded by a federal sponsor, including NSF or PHS (including  the National Institutes of Health) are required to comply with Caltech™s  Policy and Procedures for Managing Conflict of Interest Requirements  Imposed by Federal Sponsors, and other sponsor disclosure require -ments.Institute Policies565.0 Institutional Conflicts of Interest Policy Institutional conflicts of interest differ from individual conflicts of  interest. An institutional conflict of interest is a situation in which the  research, teaching, outreach, or other activities of Caltech may be  compromised because of an external financial or business relationship  held by Caltech that may bring financial gain to Caltech.5.1   Identifying Institutional Conflicts of Interest Caltech has many legitimate interests that may at times conflict.  Management of institutional conflicts of interest is by its very  nature more complex than that of individual conflicts of interest.  External relationships to sponsors and supporters of the insti -tution, the local community™s acceptance of economic develop -ment activities, the institution™s obligations as a charitable orga -nization receiving preferential tax treatment, and the institution™s  perception of its teaching, research, and academic missions  all impact how potential conflicts of interest are managed. The  examples and issues presented below do not necessarily con -stitute inappropriate conflicts of interest. Each situation must be  judged on the facts and merits of the relationship with an eye  to what reasonable individuals outside Caltech might consider  to be appropriate. Any activity, financial and/or operational,  that may bring into question Caltech™s reputation, integrity, and  objectivity should be considered for possible conflicts of interest.  The following are examples of potential situations that may give  rise to institutional conflicts of interest:  5.1.1  Significant gifts to Caltech from a commercial sponsor of        research may raise questions about the influence of the        company on Caltech™s research programs and how they           are managed. Similar concerns arise when individual           companies sponsor research or provide significant           consulting income to a significant number of faculty       members within a single academic division. Gifts or          promise of gifts, in exchange for favorable terms on a           technology license or a first look at intellectual property        may also pose a problem.   5.1.2  The acquisition of goods and services for Caltech          represents a large portion of Caltech™s expenditures.        Purchasing goods and services from companies that        sponsor research at Caltech, or who are licensees of        Institute technology, may raise issues similar to those        raised by large gifts from commercial sponsors.   5.1.3  A potential institutional conflict of interest exists simply by        Caltech having a license agreement with, or an equity        position in, a company sponsoring a faculty member™s           research. In these situations, there may be, or may appear        to be, a bias to accept terms and conditions that would          facilitate the company™s success.  General Information575.2   Reporting Institutional Conflicts of Interest If you identify a situation that appears to be an institutional con-flict of interest, you should report the situation to either the vice  president for administration and chief financial officer or to the  provost on campus or to the associate director for business at  JPL. You may also make a report by calling the Campus Hotline  at (626) 395-8787 or the JPL Ethics Office at (818) 354-6338 or  submitting a hotline form.DISABILITY AND REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION  1.0  Policy It is Caltech™s policy to comply fully with the Americans with Disabilities  Act (ADA), the Rehabilitation Act, and other applicable federal and state laws to ensure equal opportunity for otherwise qualified individuals with  disabilities, including disabled veterans. Caltech does not discriminate based on physical or mental disabilities and is committed to ensuring that there is no unlawful discrimination or harassment in any of its aca -demic or employment programs, services, activities, or in any terms  and conditions of employment. As required by law, Caltech will make reasonable accommodations to  otherwise qualified individuals with known disabilities, including students,  faculty, postdoctoral scholars, staff, volunteers, interns, and job applicants,  to ensure equal employment opportunities and equal access to Caltech  educational programs, services, activities, and facilities unless doing so  would constitute an undue hardship or a fundamental alteration. Caltech  also will provide reasonable accommodations to employees with pregnan -cy-related conditions consistent with federal and state law. Caltech also, as appropriate, will conduct a fair, timely, and thorough  investigation into complaints within the scope of this policy to deter-mine what occurred and take reasonable steps to remedy the effects of  any discrimination and prevent recurrence of the behavior. Caltech pro -vides all parties with appropriate due process and reaches reasonable  conclusions based on the evidence collected. Caltech takes appropri -ate action, including disciplinary measures, when warranted. 2.0  ADA Coordinators The following individuals have been designated to coordinate Caltech™s  efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under applicable  disability laws and Caltech policy (ADA coordinators). Individuals who  believe they have been discriminated against based on their disability or who wish to request an accommodation should contact the appro -priate Caltech ADA coordinator. ADA Coordinators for Undergraduate and Graduate Students: Marc Lazar, (626) 395-2961 Accessibility Services SpecialistInstitute Policies58ADA Coordinator for Faculty:  Stacey Scoville, (626) 395-6320Administrator, Office of the Provost ADA Coordinators for Staff, Postdoctoral Scholars, Volunteers, and Interns at Campus: Ofelia Velazquez-Perez, (626) 395-3819 Director, Employee and Organizational Development  Taynora Lee, (626) 395-3092 Assistant Director, Disability and Leave Administration ADA Coordinator for Employees, Volunteers, and Interns at JPL: Veronica Jarquin, (818) 354-6146 Human Resources Consultant Janella Quintero, (818) 354-0504 Human Resources Consultant 3.0  Reasonable AccommodationsCaltech will provide reasonable accommodations that are appropri -ate and consistent with legal requirements. In evaluating requests for  accommodations, Caltech will engage in a timely and good-faith inter-active process with the requesting individual to determine what, if any,  accommodations should be provided. Caltech has the right to request  documentation supporting an accommodation request, including doc -umentation of the disability when the disability or the need for accom-modation is not obvious. 4.0 Right to File a GrievanceAn individual who believes they have been the subject of disability discrimination may file a grievance. In addition, after engaging in the interactive process and after Caltech has determined whether a reason -able accommodation is available, an individual requesting an accom -modation who disagrees with the decision may file a grievance under  the Disability and Reasonable Accommodation Grievance Procedures.  Grievance procedures may be obtained from the appropriate ADA coor -dinator or at the links provided at the end of this policy.  5.0 Right to File Complaint with Outside AgencyEmployees and applicants may also file a complaint with the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the California Department  of Fair Employment and Housing, and the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, or the U.S.  Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. Students may file  complaints with the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil  General Information59Rights at (415) 486-5555 (or OCR.SanFrancisco@ed.gov) or (800) 421-3481 (or OCR@ed.gov). Complaints may also be directed to the Bureau  for Private Postsecondary Education at https://bppe.ca.gov/.Related Policies and Procedures:  Nondiscrimination and Equal Employment Opportunity Unlawful Harassment  Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination,  Harassment, and Retaliation  Disability and Reasonable Accommodation Grievance Procedures  ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH, AND SAFETY  1.0  Policy Caltech, including its division the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (ﬁJPLﬂ),  is committed to conducting activities in a manner that promotes the  safety and health of faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, students, and  visitors; applies sound practices in environmental stewardship; and  minimizes risk to Caltech property. Activities at Caltech are to be con -ducted in accordance with the following guiding principles:  The responsibility for implementing and maintaining a safe  environment rests on all faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, stu -dents, and visitors at Caltech. Faculty, supervisors, and managers are responsible for estab -lishing good environmental health and safety practices in their  laboratories, classrooms, and workplaces, and for providing safe  equipment and facilities for faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars,  students, and visitors. All faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, students, and visitors are  expected to keep themselves informed of conditions affecting  their health and safety, participate in safety training, follow prop -er environmental, health and safety policies and procedures,  and report accidents and potentially unsafe or illegal conditions  or practices promptly to their supervisor or manager or other  appropriate office.   Caltech activities must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local environmental, health and safety laws and regula -tions. 2.0  Roles and ResponsibilitiesCaltech has the responsibility to establish environmental, health and  safety policies and procedures, and provide resources to ensure com -pliance with environmental and safety laws. Caltech performs these  functions through the following committees and administrative and  management structure:  Institute Policies60General Information 2.1  Institute Environment, Health and Safety Committee  Caltech™s Institute Environment, Health and Safety Committee  (ﬁIEHSCﬂ) is responsible for recommending campus wide envi -ronmental, health and safety policies to the president.     The IEHSC is responsible for making recommendations  regarding the allocation of Institute resources so as to maintain  environmental (e.g., air emissions, soil contamination, water  discharges, hazardous waste management) and workplace  health and safety compliance. In addition, the committee mon-itors developments through the campus Environment, Health,  and Safety Office to ensure that Institute policies are observed,  remain current, and are consistent with the anticipated changes  in regulatory requirements.  2.2  Campus Environment, Health, and Safety Office  The Environment, Health, and Safety Office (ﬁEHSﬂ), which  reports to the associate vice president for facilities, is respon -sible for providing technical, regulatory, and related advisory  services to the campus community. EHS works in partnership  with the academic divisions and administrative departments to develop and implement safety programs that provide technical  guidance and training support relevant to the operations of the  laboratories and workplace, are practical to carry out, and com -ply with the law. This includes general orientation in prudent lab -oratory practices, emergency response procedures, occupational  safety, and familiarity with Institute environmental, health and  safety policies and procedures. EHS also initiates site reviews  to assess potential hazards and determine effective controls,  and coordinates hazardous waste training and hazardous waste  disposal. EHS, working closely with the Office of the General  Counsel, reviews legislation, recommends policies, provides reg -ulatory agencies with required data and reports, and investigates  and reports environmental, health and safety incidents.  2.3  Campus Division Chairs and Department Heads The Caltech campus consists of divisions conducting research  and educational activities, and administrative departments sup-porting the operations of Caltech. It is the responsibility of each  division chair and department head to ensure that their units  conduct operations in accordance with applicable laws and  regulations and implement Caltech™s environmental, health and  safety policies and procedures. Division chairs and department  heads maintain responsibility for day-to-day management and  implementation of their environmental, health and safety pro -grams.   Division chairs and department heads may designate an individual with the authority to implement, manage, and enforce  environmental, health and safety compliance programs within  the division or administrative office. With guidance and assis -tance from EHS, the responsible individual (i.e. the division chair,  department head or their designee) shall manage the environ -mental, health and safety activities in the division or department.61Institute Policies 2.4 JPL Office of Safety and Mission Success The Office of Safety and Mission Success at JPL (ﬁJPL OSMSﬂ)  establishes and leads the Environmental, Health and Safety and  Mission Assurance Programs for projects, programs and major  tasks. JPL OSMS appropriately manages risks and enhances the  probability of mission safety and success. In this capacity, JPL  OSMS is an independent organization, reporting directly to the  JPL director. JPL OSMS continually assesses risk and provides  infrastructure to ensure that JPL maintains compliance with the  JPL Prime Contract and applicable federal, state, and local envi-ronmental, health and safety requirements. JPL OSMS applies  knowledge, innovation, and independence to achieve successful missions that inspire the world while safeguarding JPL™s people,  assets and reputation.  2.5  JPL Environmental, Health and Safety Program Management The JPL Occupational Safety Program Office, the JPL Systems  Safety Program Office, and the JPL Environmental Affairs  Program Office are chartered with establishing and leading pro -grams related to occupational safety, systems safety, and envi -ronmental compliance, respectively, and are tasked with appro -priately managing risks and enhancing the probability of mission  safety and success. These JPL program offices, working closely  with the Office of the General Counsel, review legislation, rec -ommend policies, provide regulatory agencies with required data  and reports, and investigate and report environmental, health  and safety incidents. Each of the environmental, health and safe -ty program management offices has office-specific policies that  are detailed in JPL Rules!  2.6  Campus and JPL Manager and Supervisor Responsibilities All managers and supervisors, both academic and administra-tive, at campus and JPL, are responsible for conducting opera -tions in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and  Caltech policies, practices, and programs. Managers are respon -sible for ensuring that areas under their management have ade -quate resources for environmental, health and safety programs,  practices and equipment. Managers are also responsible to  ensure that those areas under their management are in compli -ance with Caltech™s environmental, health and safety policies,  practices, and programs.    Supervisors, including principal investigators (ﬁPIsﬂ), with guidance and assistance from the environmental, health and  safety offices listed above, are responsible for implementing  environmental, health and safety policies, practices, and pro -grams, ensuring that workplaces, including laboratories and equipment, are safe and well-maintained, training and informing  employees, students, and visitors about workplace-specific hazards and safety procedures, providing personal protective  equipment, correcting violations, investigating incidents and  complaints, overseeing proper storage and disposal of hazard -ous materials, enforcing policies (including appropriately disci -plining employees and students who violate environmental and  62safety requirements), and appropriately documenting activities  and processes.    Faculty are responsible for the safety of work undertaken in  their laboratories. Faculty members may designate a qualified individual, known as a Safety Coordinator, and empower that  individual to assist in the day-to day safety activities within their research groups, however faculty members remain fully respon -sible for the safe conduct of work in their laboratories. 2.7 All faculty, staff and students  All faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and students at campus  and JPL are responsible for:       health and safety,       governing organization™s policy and their supervisors,        classrooms, and laboratories, and      activities or serious hazards in the workplace, classroom or    laboratory, and cooperatively participating in the investigation   and/or remediation of any incidents.    The success of Caltech™s environmental, health and safety    management activities requires the active involvement of    individuals through participation in training, compliance with    established environmental, health and safety procedures, and    reporting hazards and potential violations.    It is the responsibility of all faculty, staff, postdoctoral    scholars, and students at Caltech to disclose fully any activity   that may result in a violation of environmental, health or    safety laws or regulations, and to cooperatively participate in    the investigation and remediation of any incidents.   2.8 Visitors and Contractors  Visitors and those who do business with Caltech either at  Campus or JPL, such as contractors, consultants and vendors, are responsible for performing their work in a manner that pro -tects Caltech from environmental, health and safety risks, and  complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations and all applicable environmental, health and safety  policies, practices and programs.  3.0 ReportingIn matters of actual or potential regulatory enforcement action,  investigations, or employee complaints, the appropriate environmental,  health and safety office will work closely with the Office of the General  Counsel to coordinate Caltech™s response to external regulatory agen -cies concerned with workplace health, safety, and environmental com -pliance. Any questions or concerns regarding compliance should be brought  to the attention of the appropriate manager or supervisor, or to the  appropriate environmental, health and safety office. Alternatively, con -General Information63cerns can be raised with the appropriate division chair or vice president  at campus, or the OSMS director at JPL. In addition, concerns can  be raised anonymously for campus through the anonymous hotline  (626) 395-8787 or (888) 395-8787 or online at Caltech Hotline or, for  JPL, through the JPL OSPO 24-hour Immediate Mishap and Close  Call Reporting line (IMACC) (818) 354-2141,or the Occupational Safety Program Office (OSPO). 4.0 SanctionsCaltech expects all faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and students  to be vigilant in complying with all environmental, health and safety  requirements, and to properly conduct their activities at Caltech. Local, state, and federal laws and regulations establish civil and  criminal penalties for violations of environmental, health and safety laws  and regulations, including substantial fines and possible imprisonment.  Caltech views compliance with all laws, regulations, and Institute  guidelines as conditions of employment, and violation of such require -ments shall be considered grounds for disciplinary action up to and  including termination of employment or involuntary leave/expulsion from Caltech.  NONDISCRIMINATION AND  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY  1.0 PolicyCaltech is committed to equal opportunity for all persons. It prohibits  discrimination and harassment in employment based on the following protected characteristics (unlawful discrimination and harassment):  Race (includes hair texture and protective hairstyle)   Color  Religion (includes religious dress and grooming practices)   Sex/gender (includes pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, and/ or related medical conditions)  Gender identity and gender expression   Sexual orientation   Marital status   Medical condition (genetic characteristics, cancer, or a record or  history of cancer)  Military or veteran status  National origin (includes language use and possession of a driv-er™s license issued to persons unable to prove that their pres -ence in the United States is authorized under federal law) Ancestry  Disability (mental and physical, including HIV/AIDS, cancer, and  genetic characteristics)  Genetic information   Request for family care leave   Request for leave for a serious health condition  Request for Pregnancy Disability Leave Institute Policies64 Domestic violence victim status  Age (over 40)  Criminal Background (Fair Chance Act)  Any other factor protected by federal, state, or local law  Association with an individual who is in one of the foregoing  protected characteristics It is the policy of Caltech to provide a work and academic envi -ronment free of discrimination as required by federal and state law.  Discrimination is different treatment based on protected characteris -tic listed above and/or applying policies and practices that have an adverse impact on individuals based on protected characteristics.  Harassment on the basis of any legally protected characteristic is a  form of discrimination and is likewise prohibited by this policy.  The law prohibits discrimination by co-workers and third parties as  well as supervisors and managers. Interns, volunteers, and persons  performing services under a contract with Caltech are also covered  by this policy. Caltech will take all reasonable steps to eliminate dis -crimination and harassment in its work and academic environment.  Complaints concerning Sex- and Gender-Based discrimination and  harassment and sexual misconduct are governed by the Sex- and  Gender-Based Misconduct Policy. Caltech is an equal employment opportunity and affirmative action  employer, and will, whenever possible, actively recruit and include for  employment members of underrepresented minority groups, women,  protected veterans, or individuals with disabled veteran status, and  otherwise qualified persons with disabilities. Caltech will hire, transfer,  recruit, train, and promote based on the qualifications of the individ -ual to ensure equal consideration and fair treatment of all. All other  employment actions, such as work assignments, appointments, com-pensation, evaluations, training, benefits, layoffs, and terminations are  governed by this policy. Personnel actions will be reviewed to ensure  adherence to this policy. 2.0 Responsible AdministratorsCaltech™s associate vice president for human resources and JPL™s  director for human resources have been assigned to direct the estab -lishment of and to monitor the implementation of personnel procedures  to guide our affirmative action programs. They will have responsibility  to review and update the affirmative action plans annually, including  responsibility for the audit and reporting system. A notice explaining  Caltech™s policies will remain posted. In addition, Caltech has designated equal opportunity coordinators  who are responsible for assisting with and coordinating the education  and compliance efforts relating to equal opportunity and nondiscrimi -nation laws and Caltech policies. The following individuals have been designated as equal employment opportunity coordinators: the provost  is the coordinator for faculty, the assistant vice president for human  resources is the coordinator for campus staff and volunteers, the asso -ciate deans of students are the coordinators for undergraduate stu -dents and interns, the dean of graduate studies is the coordinator for  General Information65graduate students and interns, and the director for human resources at  the Jet Propulsion Laboratory is the coordinator for employees, interns,  and volunteers assigned there. The assistant vice president for equity  and equity investigations, who manages the Equity and Title IX Office,  has been designated as Caltech™s Title IX coordinator. The contact  number is (626) 395-3132, email: equity@caltech.edu, or the office in  Room 205, Center for Student Services. The Title IX coordinator is sup -ported by four deputy coordinators for faculty, staff, and students, and  employees at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Further information  is available on the website of the Equity and Title IX Office.   Managers and supervisors are responsible for monitoring decisions  regarding personnel actions to ensure that these decisions are based  solely on factors other than protected characteristics and on legitimate,  nondiscriminatory job requirements for the position in question and the  reasonableness of any necessary accommodations for persons with a  disability. 3.0  Reporting Concerns and Complaints Individuals who become aware of, witness, or experience conduct they  believe to be in violation of this policy are urged to contact any of the  above-mentioned coordinators, the Caltech Equity and Title IX Office,  or JPL Employee Relations Group immediately.   In addition, they may utilize Caltech™s anonymous hotline at (626)  395-8787. Complaints will be investigated promptly, in accordance with  the Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment  and Retaliation (ﬁUnlawful Harassment Proceduresﬂ). Confidentiality will  be maintained to the extent possible. Supervisors and managers are  required to report any complaints of discriminatory conduct to one of  the above-designated coordinators so that Caltech can try to resolve  the complaint internally. Individuals who violate this policy may be sub -ject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employ-ment or expulsion.4.0 Reporting to Outside AgenciesIn addition, employees who believe they have been subject to unlawful harassment or discrimination have the right to file a complaint with the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the California  Department of Fair Employment and Housing, which have the authority to remedy violations. Employees, students, and others participating  in Caltech™s educational programs and activities may file complaints  with the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights at (415)  486-5555 (or ocr.sanfrancisco@ed.gov) or (800) 421-3481 (or OCR@ ed.gov). Complaints may also be directed to the Bureau for Private  Postsecondary Education at http://bppe.ca.gov. 5.0 Investigation of ComplaintsCaltech will conduct a fair, timely, and thorough investigation into com -plaints within the scope of this policy to determine what occurred and  take reasonable steps to remedy the effects of any discrimination and  prevent recurrence of the behavior. Caltech provides all parties with  Institute Policies66appropriate due process and reaches reasonable conclusions based  on the evidence collected. Caltech takes appropriate action, including  disciplinary measures, when warranted. 6.0  Policy against RetaliationNo one may intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any  individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured  by this policy or the related procedures, or because the individual has  made a report or complaint, testified, assisted, participated, or refused to  participate in any manner in any action or process under this policy or the  related procedures. Intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination for the  purpose of interfering with any right under this policy or the related proce -dures constitutes retaliation. The rights and privileges secured under this  policy and the related procedures include but are not limited to: (i) filing or  assisting in the filing of a complaint or report of a suspected violation of  this policy; (ii) opposing any act or practice made unlawful by any federal,  state or local laws requiring equal opportunity; (iii) participating, assisting,  or otherwise cooperating in an investigation, compliance review, hearing,  or any other activity related to a violation of this policy or administration  of any federal, state, or local law requiring equal opportunity; and/or (iv)  exercising any legal right protected by federal, state, or local law requiring  equal opportunity.  The following actions do not constitute retaliation: the exercise of  rights protected under the First Amendment or Caltech™s charging an  individual with a policy violation for making a materially false statement in bad faith in the course of a resolution process. A determination that  a respondent was responsible for alleged misconduct alone is not suf -ficient to conclude that any party made a materially false statement in bad faith.Complaints of retaliation will be addressed under the Unlawful  Harassment Procedures.   7.0  Informational Resources Information on equal employment opportunity and nondiscrimina-tion, as well as copies of Caltech™s Nondiscrimination and Equal  Employment Opportunity, Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment  and Retaliation, Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct, and Violence  Prevention policies are available from Caltech™s Title IX coordinator and  deputy coordinators, Human Resources, Student Affairs and deans™  offices, the Center for Inclusion & Diversity resident associates, the  Staff and Faculty Consultation Center, and Employee & Organizational  Development at campus, and Employee Relations and the Human Resources Business Partners at JPL. The policies, available at the  links below, are published in the Caltech Catalog and on the following  Caltech websites:  Caltech Human Resources, JPL Human Resources,  Equity and Title IX, and Student Affairs. General Information678.0 Caltech™s Commitment to Equal Opportunity and  NondiscriminationTo ensure equal employment opportunity and nondiscrimination, each  member of the Caltech community must understand the importance of this policy and their responsibilities to contribute to its success. The  president of Caltech fully supports Caltech™s equal opportunity and  affirmative action policies.  Related Policies and Procedures:  Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment and Retaliation Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination,  Harassment, and Retaliation Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct  Procedures for Complaints of Sex- and Gender-Based  Misconduct under Title IX  Disability and Reasonable Accommodation   SEX- AND GENDER-BASED MISCONDUCT SECTION I: INTRODUCTION1.0 PolicyAll members of the Caltech community have the right to be treated,  and the responsibility to treat others, with dignity and respect. These  principles are fundamental to the educational and intellectual mission  of Caltech. It is the policy of Caltech to provide a work and academic  environment free of discrimination, harassment, sexual misconduct,  and retaliation. Caltech will not tolerate such conduct and is committed  to educating the community in ways to prevent its occurrence. As defined in this policy, sex- and gender-based discrimination, sex -ual and gender-based harassment, and sexual misconduct, including  sexual assault, sexual battery (i.e., nonconsensual sexual contact), dat-ing and domestic violence, sexual exploitation, and stalking constitute prohibited conduct and violate this policy. Such conduct generally vio -lates Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; Title IX of the Education Code; and/or California law.  All individuals are protected against prohibited conduct (defined  below in Section III) regardless of gender. For the purposes of this pol -icy, the term ﬁgenderﬂ is broadly defined, encompassing sex, sexual  orientation, gender identity, and gender expression. Prohibited conduct  can be committed by individuals of any gender and can occur between or among individuals of the same gender or different genders, strang -ers, or acquaintances as well as people involved in intimate or sexual relationships.  Caltech also prohibits retaliation against an individual who reports,  submits a complaint, or otherwise participates in good faith in any mat-ter related to this policy.  Caltech will take prompt and equitable action upon receiving a  Institute Policies68report of prohibited conduct to determine what occurred and will take  steps to stop and remedy the effects of any such conduct and prevent  its recurrence. Caltech provides all parties with appropriate due pro -cess and will take appropriate action, including disciplinary measures,  when warranted, up to and including termination of employment or changes to student enrollment status, including expulsion.  Any reference in this policy to a Caltech administrator is understood  to include not only that administrator but also their designee. 2.0 ScopeThis policy applies to all current students, faculty, supervisory and non -supervisory staff, postdoctoral scholars, volunteers, interns, vendors,  independent contractors, persons performing services under contract with the Institute, visitors, and any other individuals who are regularly or  temporarily employed, studying, living, visiting, or otherwise participat-ing in Caltech™s educational programs or activities (ﬁcovered personsﬂ).  The requirement not to discriminate in Caltech™s educational programs  or activities also extends to admissions and employment. Inquiries about the application to Caltech of Title IX and its implementing regula -tions may be referred to the Title IX Coordinator. This policy applies to (a) prohibited conduct occurring on Institute- controlled property, at Institute-sponsored events, in Institute programs  or activities, or Institute-owned or controlled residential facilities,  regardless of location; (b) prohibited conduct occurring on property or  at events controlled or sponsored by Institute-affiliated organizations  including student organizations, regardless of location; (c) prohibited  conduct occurring off campus, in any location or context, whenever the  respondent and the complainant are covered persons, if, based on the  allegations, there is any reason to believe that the incident could con -tribute to a hostile educational environment or otherwise interfere with  a student™s access to education; or (d) prohibited conduct  occurring  outside of Caltech™s educational programs or activities, whether they  occurred on or off campus, if, based on the allegations, there is any  reason to believe that the incident could contribute to a hostile edu -cational environment or otherwise interfere with a student™s access to  education.Organizations affiliated with the Institute or that use Caltech property  or resources in connection with their activities also are prohibited from  engaging in prohibited conduct.  This policy also applies at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL).  Members of the Caltech community are encouraged to promptly  report prohibited conduct to Caltech or consult with a confidential  resource (see Appendix: Support Resources), regardless of where the  incident occurred or who committed it. Supervisory employees and  other Responsible Employees are required to promptly report prohib -ited conduct.  An individual who has experienced sexual misconduct is encouraged to immediately seek assistance from a medical provider  and report the incident to local law enforcement, which the confiden -tial Campus Sexual Violence Advocate can coordinate and facilitate.  Reports to Caltech and law enforcement may be pursued simultane -ously.   General Information69Even if Caltech does not have jurisdiction under this policy over the  person accused of prohibited conduct, or the allegations reported, Caltech  will take prompt action, as warranted and appropriate, to provide for the  safety and well-being of the individual reporting and the campus commu -nity, including taking reasonable steps to stop and remedy the effects of  the prohibited conduct and to prevent recurrence of the behavior. 3.0 RetaliationRetaliation against any member of the Caltech community at any point in time for making a good-faith report of prohibited conduct or par -ticipating or refusing to participate in any manner in an investigation,  proceeding, or hearing conducted by Caltech or a state or federal  agency is strictly prohibited. Retaliation is defined as overt or covert  acts of reprisal, interference, discrimination, intimidation, or harassment  against an individual or group for exercising their rights under Title IX or  other federal and state laws. Threats of retaliatory action also constitute  retaliation.  Retaliation violates this policy and is unlawful.  Retaliation does not include charging an individual with a code of  conduct violation for making a materially false statement in bad faith during the course of an investigation, proceeding, or hearing related to  this policy, provided, however, that a determination regarding responsi -bility, alone, is not sufficient to conclude that any party made a materi -ally false statement in bad faith.The following are examples of conduct that may constitute retaliation:  A faculty or staff supervisor suspects and assigns blame for an  anonymous report to the Equity and Title IX Office and gives the  suspected reporter undesirable work or lab assignments, or a  lesser recommendation or salary increase than the suspected  reporter merits based on their actual work.  A faculty or staff supervisor refuses to continue to work with a  student, subordinate, or colleague who has reported a concern  about them to the Equity and Title IX Office.  A student spreads false information around the house about  a fellow student who has reported a concern about them or a  friend to the Equity and Title IX Office.  A student gets other students to engage in ﬁblackballingﬂ or socially ostracizing behavior against a student who was called as a witness in a Title IX investigation where the respondent was  a friend of the student organizing the blackballing. A staff supervisor requires an employee who raised concerns  with them about differential treatment between men and women  on the team to track her weekly time on assignments, but no one else is required to track their time, and there is no prior  employment history to support the necessity of tracking time.Caltech will take steps to prevent retaliation and will take prompt  and appropriate corrective action to stop and remedy its effects if  retaliation occurs. Caltech will involve senior academic, administrative,  and Student Affairs leadership, as required, to prevent and remedy  retaliation. Individuals who violate Caltech™s policy prohibiting retaliation  may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment or expulsion from Caltech.  Institute Policies704.0 Preservation of Evidence of Prohibited Conduct Prohibited conduct, as defined in this policy, may also be a crime.  Individuals who have experienced sexual violence are urged to seek  medical treatment as soon as possible. Sexual assault forensic exams  (or rape kit tests) are available free of charge at multiple local medical  centers (see the Appendix: Support Resources chart at the end of this  section) and facilitate both evidence preservation and any necessary  medical treatment. Evidence preservation is important in case an indi -vidual would like to file a report with law enforcement, pursue civil liti -gation, or obtain a protective order. If an individual chooses to receive  a forensic exam, they should avoid showering, bathing, douching,  eating, drinking, washing their hands, or brushing their teeth until after the medical examination. Exams should be performed within 72 hours of the incident. Individuals should save all clothing worn at the time  of the assault. Each item of clothing should be placed in a separate paper bag, not a plastic bag. Individuals who have experienced sexual violence are strongly encouraged to preserve all physical and electronic  evidence. Electronic evidence relating to any type of incident of prohibited  conduct, such as texts, emails, and social media posts, should be pre -served.Once an individual reports a concern or receives notification of their  involvement in a report or complaint under this policy, whether as a  respondent or witness, they are required to preserve any physical or  electronic evidence they have. An intentional failure to preserve such  evidence may be grounds for disciplinary action.  5.0 Emergency Notifications and Timely Warnings In the event of a dangerous situation on campus that has involved  an immediate threat to the health or safety of students or employ -ees, Caltech will issue an emergency notification consistent with its  emergency notification procedures. In the event that Caltech believes  that there is a serious or continuing threat to the campus community,  Caltech will issue a timely warning consistent with its timely warning  procedures. Emergency notifications and timely warnings do not dis -close the name of the victim.SECTION II: REPORTING CONCERNS AND COMPLAINTS 6.0 Reporting to CaltechAny person may report prohibited conduct, whether or not the person  reporting is the person alleged to be the victim of the alleged prohibited  conduct. They may make their report in person, by mail, by telephone,  by electronic mail, or by any other means that results in the Title IX  Coordinator receiving their verbal or written report. They may also use  the Report Form on the Equity and Title IX Office website, which can be  submitted anonymously by not filling in the contact information.  The Report Form is also available from the Equity and Title IX Office and at  equity.caltech.edu. A member of the Caltech community who wishes to  report prohibited conduct should do so as soon as possible after the  incident, although reports may be made at any time.  General Information71Anyone who witnesses, experiences, or is otherwise aware of con -duct that the individual believes to be in violation of this policy, includ -ing retaliation, is urged to contact Caltech immediately. Individuals  are encouraged to report to the Title IX Coordinator or a deputy  coordinator. Any employee in a supervisory role, including faculty,  must promptly report all alleged sexual harassment, sex and gen -der-based misconduct, and retaliation, regardless of its alleged severity  or frequency, to the Title IX Coordinator at campus or Deputy Title IX  Coordinator for JPL, who will provide guidance and advice. In addition,  other employees qualifying as Responsible Employees under 6.2 below must promptly report any instance of prohibited conduct to the Title IX  Coordinator or the Deputy Title IX Coordinator for JPL, as appropriate. If a member of the Caltech community would like support and guidance in reporting prohibited conduct, they may contact the Title  IX Coordinator or a deputy coordinator, one of the deans or associate  deans, the director of employee and organizational development in  Human Resources, or the JPL section manager of talent management  or Human Resources Business Partners at JPL. They may also contact  any of the EEO coordinators identified in the Nondiscrimination and  Equal Employment Opportunity Policy. Caltech is committed to protecting the privacy of all individuals  involved in a report of prohibited conduct. All administrators involved  in responding to a report of prohibited conduct understand the impor -tance of properly safeguarding private information. Caltech will make  every effort to protect individuals™ privacy interests consistent with  Caltech™s obligation to address reports made to Caltech.  A student who participates as a complainant or witness in an investi-gation of sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, or stalking will not be subject to disciplinary sanctions for a violation of Caltech™s  student conduct policies at or near the time of the incident, including but not limited to the Substance Abuse policy, unless Caltech deter -mines that the violation was egregious, including but not limited to an  action that places the health or safety of any other person at risk or involves conduct that violates Caltech™s policies prohibiting discrimi -nation or other serious misconduct like plagiarism, cheating, research  misconduct, or other forms of academic dishonesty.   6.1 Title IX Coordinator and Deputy Coordinators  The Title IX Coordinator is responsible for coordinating Caltech™s  compliance with Title IX and for Caltech™s overall response to  prohibited conduct falling under Title IX. The Title IX Coordinator  oversees the implementation and application of this policy and the related procedures to ensure the prompt and equitable res -olution of complaints and the consistent treatment of the parties  involved. In doing so, the Title IX Coordinator oversees all Title  IX-covered and other sex- and gender-based misconduct com -plaints, monitors outcomes, identifies and addresses any pat -terns of systemic problems that arise, and assesses effects on  the campus climate.    The Title IX Coordinator is supported by four deputy Title IX  Coordinators and a lead investigator, all of whom can answer  Institute Policies72questions regarding Caltech™s Title IX-related policies and Title  IX.    Deputy Title IX Coordinators also generally serve as co-in -vestigators to the lead investigator under the formal investigation process set out in the Procedures for Complaints of Sexual  Misconduct. Title IX Coordinator  Assistant Vice President for Equity and Equity Investigations  Hima Vatti  (626) 395-3132, equity@caltech.edu, 205 Center for Student Services Lead Investigator Pari Le Golchehreh   (626) 395-4424, parig@caltech.edu, 348 Center for Student Services Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Students  Billie Dawn Greenblatt  (626) 395-1743, 215 Center for Student Services Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Faculty  Melany Hunt  (626) 395-4231, hunt@caltech.edu, 265 Gates-Thomas Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Staff and Postdoctoral Scholars  and Director, Employee and Organizational Development  Ofelia Velazquez-Perez   (626) 395-3819, Ofelia.Velazquez-Perez@caltech.edu, 206  Central Engineering Services Deputy Title IX Coordinator for JPL  Jackie Clennan-Price (818) 393-0016, Jackie.A.Clennanprice@jpl.nasa.gov, Human  Resources T1720-165 at JPL  The following persons are authorized to initiate corrective  action in response to reports of prohibited conduct covered  under section 15.0 and 16.0 on Caltech™s behalf: Title IX  Coordinator, Deputy Title IX Coordinators, Director of Employee  and Organizational Development, Associate Vice President for  Human Resources, and JPL Director for Human Resources.    6.2 Responsible Employees If an individual discloses prohibited conduct to any Responsible  Employee, or if a Responsible Employee through any person or  means, whether directly or indirectly, becomes aware of prohibited  conduct, they must report to the Title IX Coordinator all relevant  details about the alleged conduct.     A Responsible Employee is broadly defined to mean an employ -ee who has the authority to take action to redress sexual harass -General Information73ment or provide supportive measures to students, or who has the  duty to report sexual harassment to an appropriate school official  who has that authority.  At campus, the following are Responsible Employees:        and staff, and associated staff in the Equity and Title IX Office            including Residential Life Coordinators     employment     Caltech has not designated as confidential resources           (e.g., employees who are club advisors, music coaches, etc.)     employment               At campus, the term Responsible Employee does not include  the licensed therapists in the Staff and Faculty Consultation Center  and the Student Wellness Counseling Services, the Campus Sexual  Violence Advocate, and the staff in Caltech™s Center for Diversity  and Inclusion, who have been designated by Caltech as confiden-tial resources.  These individuals are not required to report prohibit -ed conduct to the Title IX Coordinator unless required by law to do  so.  However, these individuals shall inform each student who pro -vides the individual with information regarding sexual harassment of  the student™s ability to report to a Responsible Employee and direct  the student to those specific reporting resources.    At JPL, the following are Responsible Employees:                At JPL, the term Responsible Employee does not include licensed therapists in JPL™s Employee Assistance Program pro -vided through Empathia. Institute Policies74       6.3 Anonymous Reporting Caltech provides the following resources for anonymous report -ing:  Campus Hotline    (626) 395-8787 or       (888) 395-8787  JPL Ethics Hotline    (818) 354-9999  JPL Protective Services Division™s  Workplace Violence Hotline     (818) 393-2851 For either Campus or JPL, by submitting a compliance Hotline Contact Form   You may also use the Report Form on the Equity and Title  IX Office website, which can be submitted anonymously by not  filling in the contact information.     If the reporting party wants to remain anonymous, they  should not share any personally identifying information. If the  reporting party does share such information, the Equity and Title  IX Office will contact the reporting party with information about  support resources and reporting options. If an investigation is  pursued, the reporting party who identified themselves will be  notified.       6.4 Notification of Law Enforcement Individuals who have experienced sexual assault, stalking, sex-ual exploitation, or domestic, relationship, or dating violence are  encouraged to notify local law enforcement. Caltech will provide  assistance in notifying law enforcement if the individual so chooses.  An individual who has experienced sexual violence also has the  right to decline to notify law enforcement or Caltech.     Caltech has an obligation under California law to report inci -dents of sexual assault to law enforcement; however, Caltech  will not report identifying information about the complainant  without the complainant™s consent after being notified of their  right to have personally identifying information withheld. If the complainant does not consent to be identified, personally identi-fying information about the respondent also will not be provided.    Individuals may also engage with the confidential Campus Sexual Violence Advocate (see Appendix: On-Campus Mental  Health and Emotional Support Resources), who can facilitate  a report to law enforcement.  The Campus Sexual Violence  Advocate will notify the Title IX Coordinator of a sexual assault  for reporting purposes but will not provide any identifying infor -mation.   Pasadena Police Department Call 911 for Emergency Response   Non-Emergency Response: (626) 744-4241  207 N. Garfield Ave., Pasadena, CA 91101 General Information757.0  Reports Involving MinorsEvery member of the Caltech community who knows of or reasonably  suspects child abuse, including any prohibited conduct involving a  minor, has a personal responsibility to report to Caltech Security or the  JPL Protective Services Division immediately. A minor under the age of  18 is not considered to be capable of giving valid affirmative consent to  sexual activity under this policy.  Caltech employees who are mandated reporters have additional,  legally required reporting obligations, including reporting immediately to  the LA County Office of Child Protection and/or the local police depart -ment. See the Violence Prevention Policy for more information.  8.0  False ReportsCaltech expects its members to act with honesty, sincerity, and good  faith in reporting concerns under this policy. Caltech will not tolerate  intentional false reporting of information, allegations, or evidence. A  good faith complaint that is not substantiated by a preponderance of  the evidence after an investigation is not considered a false report.   However, when a complainant or third party is found to have inten -tionally fabricated or knowingly misrepresented information, allegations,  or evidence, or otherwise to have acted with an intent to deceive or mislead in any of their dealings relating to Caltech™s administration of  this policy, they may be subject to disciplinary action.  9.0 Privacy Caltech will maintain the privacy of all individuals involved in a report of  prohibited conduct to the extent possible. All Caltech employees who  are involved in the Institute™s receipt of the report and the response,  including the Title IX Coordinator, deputy coordinators, and investiga -tors, receive training about respecting and safeguarding private infor -mation. Throughout the process, every effort is made to protect the  privacy interests of all individuals involved in a manner consistent with  the need for a thorough review and administration of the matter.  Privacy generally means that information related to a report of pro -hibited conduct will only be shared with those individuals who have  a ﬁneed to know.ﬂ The determination of who has a ﬁneed to knowﬂ  is within the discretion of the Title IX Coordinator. These individuals  are required to be discreet and respect the privacy of all individuals  involved.No meetings or conversations that take place under this policy, the  Procedures for Complaints of Sexual Misconduct, or the Procedures  for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation may be audio- or audio-visually recorded by anyone. The only excep -tion to this rule is that the Equity and Title IX Office, in compliance with  Title IX, will record the hearing conducted under the Title IX Complaint  Procedures in order to provide a verbatim record of the hearing. These  recordings will be maintained by the Equity and Title IX Office.  Institute Policies7610.0 Requests for Confidentiality or that Complaint Not Be Pursued With respect to allegations of prohibited conduct under this policy,  the Title IX Coordinator and deputy coordinators make every effort  to respect the concerns and goals of complainants, as well as their  capacity to make independent choices regarding resolution options for  addressing their complaints under this policy and the Title IX Complaint  Procedures.  In instances where a complainant requests that their name not  be used, that Caltech not pursue any action against the respondent,  including an investigation, or that no disciplinary action be taken, Caltech will seriously consider the request but weigh the request  against Caltech™s  responsibilities, including under applicable laws, to  take action to provide a safe, nonthreatening, and nondiscriminatory  environment for all community members, including the complainant.  The Title IX Coordinator will discuss with the complainant the reasons  for their requests and attempt to address the underlying concerns,  such as taking steps to prevent retaliation.  Where the complainant remains committed to the requests men -tioned above, the Title IX Coordinator will weigh the request against  factors that may lead the Title IX Coordinator to take action on behalf  of Caltech, which may be contrary to the wishes of the complainant, including potentially disclosing the complainant™s name and/or pro -ceeding to an investigation, to protect the health and safety of the  complainant and the Caltech community. The factors considered are  within the discretion of the Title IX Coordinator and include, but are not  limited to, the nature and seriousness of the alleged conduct, whether  the allegations are contested, the involvement of multiple respondents,  the existence of multiple or prior reports of misconduct against the  respondent, whether there was a weapon, physical restraints, battery,  or other violence involved, whether the use of alcohol or drugs to induce vulnerability to sexual activity without consent was allegedly involved, whether there is evidence of a pattern of conduct, the pres -ence of other circumstances that suggest there is a significant risk  that the respondent will commit further acts of prohibited conduct,  the age of a complainant, whether the respondent is a faculty or staff  member with oversight of students, whether there is a power imbalance  between the complainant and respondent, whether the complainant  believes that the complainant will be less safe if the complainant™s  name is disclosed or an investigation is conducted, and whether Caltech is able to conduct a thorough investigation and obtain relevant  evidence in the absence of the complainant™s cooperation. If Caltech determines that it can honor the student™s request for  confidentiality, it shall still take reasonable steps to respond to the  complaint, consistent with the request, to limit the effects of the alleged  prohibited conduct and prevent its recurrence without initiating formal  action against the alleged respondent or revealing the identity of the  complainant. These steps may include increased monitoring, supervi -sion, or security at locations or activities where the alleged misconduct  occurred; providing additional training and education materials for stu -dents and employees; or conducting climate surveys regarding sexual  violence. The institution shall also take immediate steps to provide for  General Information77the safety of the complainant while keeping the complainant™s identity  confidential as appropriate. These steps may include changing living  arrangements or course schedules, assignments, or tests. The com-plainant shall be notified that the steps Caltech will take to respond to  the complaint will be limited by the request for confidentiality. If Caltech determines that it must disclose the complainant™s identity  to the respondent or proceed with an investigation, it shall inform the  complainant prior to making this disclosure or initiating the investiga -tion. The complainant is not required to participate in the ensuing pro -cess.  Caltech shall also take immediate steps to provide for the safety  of the complainant where appropriate. In the event the complainant  requests that Caltech inform the respondent that the student asked  Caltech not to investigate or seek discipline, Caltech shall honor this request. If the complaint includes allegations that may constitute a possible crime, the Title IX Coordinator will notify the complainant of their right  to file a criminal complaint or to choose not to notify law enforcement.  The Title IX Coordinator, depending on facts and circumstances,  may also elect to file a formal complaint and initiate an investigation even if the complainant does have the standing to do so.  All final determinations and decisions taken under this provision  10.0, except the complainant™s decision to file a criminal complaint or  to choose not to notify law enforcement, rest solely with the Title IX  Coordinator.  11.0 Contacting Government Agencies Employees, students, and others participating in Caltech™s educa -tional programs or activities may direct questions regarding Title IX  to or file complaints with the U.S. Department of Education Office  for Civil Rights, (415) 486-5555, ocr.sanfrancisco@ed.gov, or (800)  421-3481, OCR@ed.gov. In addition, employees may file complaints  with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing  (DFEH) at https://www.dfeh.ca.gov/contact-us or the United States  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) at https://www. eeoc.gov. Complaints can also be directed to the Bureau for Private  Postsecondary Education at http://bppe.ca.gov. NASA-funded program participants may file a complaint at  AssistedProgramComplaint@nasa.gov or find more information at https:// missionstem.nasa.gov/filing-a-complaint.html. NSF-funded program par -ticipants may file a complaint with the Office of Diversity and Inclusion at  programcomplaints@nsf.gov, (703) 292-8020, or find more information  at https://www.nsf.gov/od/odi/harassment.jsp. Participants in programs  funded by other federal agencies providing federal financial assistance to  Caltech may file directly with those agencies. Filing a complaint with a federal agency under Title IX must be done  within 180 days of an alleged discriminatory or harassing event, and there  is no requirement to exhaust remedies through (i.e., utilize or go through)  Caltech™s internal procedures before filing directly with a federal agency.  Institute Policies7812.0 Clery ReportingThe Clery Act requires Caltech to issue an Annual Security and Fire  Safety Report, which includes crime statistics for sexual assault (rape, fondling, incest, and statutory rape), domestic violence, dating vio-lence, and stalking. Campus Security gathers these crime statistics from the Equity and Title IX Office, security reports, Pasadena Police  Department information, JPL, and reports by Campus Security author -ities. Crime statistics do not disclose any identifying information about the complainant, respondent, witnesses, or others. For more infor -mation and statistics for the past three years, see the current Annual  Security and Fire Safety Report. SECTION III: PROHIBITED CONDUCT13.0 Introduction to Prohibited Conduct Covered under This Policy This section sets out what conduct is prohibited under this policy.  For  clarity, transparency, and administrative ease, this section delineates  sexual harassment prohibited under the federal Title IX regulations  (Section 15.0) and under the California Education Code (Section 16.0).   All such misconduct is prohibited by Caltech.  Additional misconduct  prohibited by Caltech and other applicable law, including attempts and  threats of prohibited conduct, is described in Section 17.0.   Reported behavior that does not constitute prohibited conduct under  this policy but is nevertheless determined to be inappropriate pursuant  to another applicable Caltech policy may subject the offending individ -ual to disciplinary action.The term ﬁcomplainantﬂ refers to the individual who allegedly is the  subject of the prohibited conduct, and ﬁrespondentﬂ refers to the indi -vidual who is alleged to have engaged in the prohibited conduct.  The  complainant and respondent may sometimes be referred to collectively  as the ﬁpartiesﬂ in this document and the related Procedures for Sexual  Misconduct.  The Title IX Coordinator will determine whether reported prohib -ited conduct is covered under the sexual harassment provisions of  Title IX or constitutes other prohibited conduct as described under  this policy and will apply the appropriate procedures. The Title IX  Coordinator™s determination will be communicated in writing to the  parties. Allegations of Title IX-covered (Section 15.0) and California  Education Code-covered (Section 16.0) prohibited conduct will be  addressed under the Procedures for Complaints of Sexual Misconduct  (ﬁProceduresﬂ). Where multiple allegations of prohibited conduct are  at issue, and the Title IX Coordinator determines that only a portion  falls within the scope of Sections 15.0 and 16.0, all of the allegations will be adjudicated under the Procedures for Complaints of Sexual  Misconduct. Allegations of prohibited conduct falling exclusively  under Section 17.0 will be addressed under Caltech™s Procedures for  Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation. General Information7914.0 Affirmative Consent Consent is a key component of various definitions of prohibited con -duct.  Affirmative consent is the standard of consent in Caltech™s policy.   Affirmative consent is the affirmative, conscious, and voluntary agree -ment to engage in sexual activity.   It is the responsibility of each person involved in the sexual  activity to ensure that they have the affirmative consent of the  other person(s) to engage in the sexual activity.   Lack of protest or resistance does not mean consent, nor does  silence mean consent.  Affirmative consent must be ongoing throughout a sexual activ -ity and each time sexual activity is engaged in, and it can be revoked at any time. Consent to one form of sexual activity is  not, by itself, consent to other forms of sexual activity.  The existence of a dating relationship between the persons  involved, or the fact of any past sexual activity between them, should never by itself be assumed to be an indicator of consent.It is not a valid excuse, including in the evaluation of complaints in any resolution process, in response to an alleged lack of affirmative  consent that the respondent believed that the complainant consented  to the sexual activity under either of the following circumstances:  The respondent™s belief in affirmative consent arose from the  intoxication or recklessness of the respondent.  The respondent did not take reasonable steps, in the circum -stances known to the respondent at the time, to ascertain  whether the complainant affirmatively consented. It is not a valid excuse that the respondent believed that the com -plainant affirmatively consented to the sexual activity if the respondent  knew or reasonably should have known that the complainant was  unable to consent to the sexual activity under any of the following cir-cumstances:The complainant was asleep or unconscious.The complainant was incapacitated due to the influence of drugs, alcohol, or medication, so that the complainant could not understand the fact, nature, or extent of the sexual activity. The complainant was unable to communicate due to a mental or physical condition.A person who is incapacitated is not capable of giving effective con -sent to sexual activity. An incapacitated person lacks the physical and  mental capacity to make informed, reasonable judgments about wheth -er or not to engage in sexual activity. A person who is incapacitated  may not be able to understand where they are, whom they are with,  how they got there, or what is happening. A person may be incapacitated by a temporary or permanent mental  or physical condition, sleep, or unconsciousness.  A person may also  be incapacitated as a result of voluntary or involuntary (e.g., induced,  forced) consumption of alcohol or drugs. Incapacitation is a state beyond  mere intoxication or drunkenness. Just because someone is under the  influence of alcohol or drugs does not necessarily mean that a person is  incapacitated. Impairment must be significant enough to render a person  unable to understand the fact, nature, or extent of the sexual activity. In  Institute Policies80evaluating affirmative consent in cases involving an allegation of inca -pacitation, Caltech considers the state and degree of intoxication of the  reporting party and the knowledge of the respondent. One™s own intoxication, even to the point of incapacitation, does  not relieve an individual from responsibility for a policy violation when  they engage in sexual conduct without the affirmative consent of the  other party or parties. However, a respondent who was incapacitated  during sexual conduct has the right to file a formal complaint alleging they were incapacitated and unable to consent to the reported sexual  activity.  15.0 Sexual Misconduct Covered under Title IX Sexual harassment is covered under Title IX if it meets the definitions  and scope requirements set out in this section.  NOTE: While Title IX prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex,  sexual harassment is subject to specific procedures that do not apply  to complaints of sex- and gender-based discrimination. Accordingly,  sex- and gender-based discrimination is addressed separately below in  Section 17.0 to ensure that the appropriate procedures are applied.       15.1 Definition of Sexual Harassment under Title IX  Sexual harassment means conduct on the basis of sex that satisfies one or more of the following: (1) an employee of  Caltech conditioning the provision of an aid, benefit, or service  of Caltech on an individual™s participation in unwelcome sexual  conduct; (2) unwelcome conduct determined by a reasonable  person to be so severe, pervasive, and objectively offensive that  it effectively denies a person equal access to Caltech™s educa -tion program or activity; or (3) sexual assault, dating violence,  domestic violence, or stalking as defined below.   15.1.1 Sexual assault means an offense classified as a forcible  or nonforcible sex offense under the uniform crime reporting  system of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as follows:  Sex Offenses, Forcible:  Any sexual act directed against another  person without the consent of the victim, including instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent.   Forcible Rape:  The carnal knowledge of a person, forcibly and/ or against that person™s will or not forcibly or against the per -son™s will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving  consent because of his/her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity. This definition excludes statutory rape.   Forcible Sodomy:  Oral or anal sexual intercourse with another  person, forcibly and/or against that person™s will or not forcibly  or against the person™s will in instances where the victim is inca -pable of giving consent because of his/her youth or because of his/her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity.  General Information81 Sexual Assault with an Object: To use an object or instrument  to unlawfully penetrate, however slightly, the genital or anal  opening of the body of another person, forcibly and/or against  that person™s will or not forcibly or against the person™s will  in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent  because of his/her youth or because of his/her temporary or per-manent mental or physical incapacity.   Forcible Fondling:  The touching of the private body parts of another person for the purpose of sexual gratification, forcibly  and/or against that person™s will or not forcibly or against the  person™s will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving  consent because of his/her youth or because of his/her tempo-rary or permanent mental or physical incapacity.     Caltech interprets forcible fondling to include potentially,  depending on the facts and circumstances, (a) the disrobing or  exposure of another without their consent, and (b) the touching  of another person™s private body parts for the purpose of sexual  gratification without consent through clothing, as well as directly.  Sex Offenses, Nonforcible:  Unlawful, nonforcible sexual inter -course, except prostitution offenses.  Incest: Nonforcible sexual intercourse between persons who are  related to each other within the degrees wherein marriage is pro -hibited by law.   Statutory Rape: Nonforcible sexual intercourse with a person  who is under the statutory age of consent, which in California is  18.   15.1.2 Dating and Domestic Violence  Dating violence means violence committed by a person who is or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate  nature with the victim.  The existence of such a relationship  shall be determined based on a consideration of the following factors: the length of the relationship; the type of relationship;  the frequency of interaction between the persons involved in the  relationship.    Domestic violence includes felony or misdemeanor crimes (a) by a current or former spouse or intimate partner of the victim;  (b) by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common;  (c) by a person who is cohabitating with, or has cohabitated with, the victim as a spouse or intimate partner; (d) by a person similarly situated to a spouse of the victim under the domestic or family violence laws of the jurisdiction receiving grant monies; or  (e) by any another person against an adult or youth victim who is protected from that person™s acts under the domestic or family  violence laws of the jurisdiction.   Depending on the facts and circumstances, the Title IX  Coordinator may determine that not only allegations of physical  Institute Policies82violence, but also allegations of the following misconduct qualify as dating violence or domestic violence: sexual, emotional, eco-nomic and/or psychological actions or threat of actions; threats  of harm to one™s family members, friends, or self-harm; and  threats to reveal personal or confidential information (including,  but not limited to, information regarding one™s gender identi -ty or sexual orientation); and other actions or threats that are  intimidating, frightening, terrorizing, or threatening.  Allegations  that do not qualify as dating violence or domestic violence and which do not otherwise fall under Sections 15.0 or 16.0 may be adjudicated under the Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful  Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation, if deemed appropri -ate by Caltech.   15.1.3 Stalking means engaging in a course of conduct directed  at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to  fear for his or her safety or the safety of others or suffer substan -tial emotional distress.    ﬁCourse of conductﬂ means two or more acts, including, but  not limited to, acts in which the stalker directly, indirectly, or  through third parties, by any action, method, device, or means,  follows, monitors, observes, surveils, threatens, or communi -cates to or about a person, or interferes with the person™s prop -erty.    ﬁReasonable personﬂ means a reasonable person under  similar circumstances and with similar legally protected or other  characteristics to the victim.    Stalking is also covered by the Violence Prevention policy  and should be reported to the Equity and Title IX Office and  Security at campus or the Protective Services Division at JPL.      15.2 Scope of Requirements for Title IX Sexual Harassment  Title IX addresses sexual harassment in an education program or  activity of Caltech against a person in the United States.   At the time of filing a formal complaint, a complainant must be participating in or attempting to participate in an education program or activity of Caltech. The term ﬁattempting to partic -ipateﬂ includes when a complainant has: (a) applied for admis-sion; (b) graduated but intends to apply for a new program; (c)  graduated but intends to participate in alumni programs and  activities; (d) gone on leave but is still enrolled; (e) gone on leave  but intends to re-apply after the leave; (f) withdrawn due to  alleged sexual harassment and expresses a desire to re-enroll if  Caltech responds appropriately to the allegations.      The term ﬁeducation program or activityﬂ includes build -ings or other locations that are part of the school™s operations,  including remote learning platforms; (b) locations, events, or  circumstances, even if off-campus, over which Caltech exercised  substantial control over both the respondent and the context  in which the alleged sexual harassment occurred; and (c) any  building, even if off-campus, owned or controlled by a student  organization that is officially recognized by Caltech. General Information83    15.3 Limitation on Claiming Consent as a Defense to Sexual  Harassment When a consensual personal relationship arises and a power dif -ferential exists, Caltech does not consider consent as a defense  to a claim of sexual harassment. The individual in the relation -ship with greater power will be held responsible.  16.0 Sexual Misconduct Covered under the California Education Code Prohibited conduct under this policy is covered under the California  Education Code (CEC) if it meets the definitions set out below in this section.   16.1 Definition of Sexual Harassment under the CEC Sexual harassment means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal, visual, or physical  conduct of a sexual nature, made by someone from or in the  work or educational setting, under any of the following condi-tions: (1) Submission to the conduct is explicitly or implicitly made a term or a condition of an individual™s employment, academic sta -tus, or progress.  (2) Submission to, or rejection of, the conduct by the individual is  used as the basis of employment or academic decisions affect -ing the individual. (3) The conduct has the purpose or effect of having a negative  impact upon the individual™s work or academic performance, or  of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work or educa -tional environment.    When an individual sexually harasses a student, the harass-ing conduct creates a hostile environment on campus for the  purposes of this section if the conduct is sufficiently serious that  it interferes with or limits a student™s ability to participate in or  benefit from the institution™s programs or activities. The more  severe the conduct, the less need there is to show a repetitive  series of incidents to prove a hostile environment on campus,  particularly if the harassment is physical. A single or isolated incident of sexual harassment, including sexual violence, may create a hostile environment on campus if the incident is suffi -ciently severe.  (4) Submission to, or rejection of, the conduct by the individual is  used as the basis for any decision affecting the individual regarding  benefits and services, honors, programs, or activities available at or  through the educational institution.  (5) Sexual violence, which means physical sexual acts perpetrated  against a person without the person™s affirmative consent, including  rape and sexual battery.    (6) Rape, which is defined as penetration, no matter how slight, of  the vagina or anus with any part or object, or oral copulation of a  sex organ by another person, without the consent of the victim.    (7) Sexual battery, which means the (a) intentional touching,  directly or through clothing, of another person™s intimate parts  Institute Policies84without consent, (b) intentionally causing a person to touch the intimate parts of another, directly or through clothing, without  consent, or (c) using a person™s own intimate part to intentionally  touch another person™s body, directly or through clothing, with -out consent.   Intimate body parts are the breast, genitals, groin, anus, or  buttocks. (8) Sexual exploitation, which means a person taking sexual advantage of another person for the benefit of anyone other than that person without that person™s consent, including, but not lim -ited to, any of the following acts:   (a) The prostituting of another person.    (b) The trafficking of another person, defined as the        inducement of a person to perform a commercial sex act,            or labor or services, through force, fraud, or coercion.    (c) The recording of images, including video or photograph,         or audio of another person™s sexual activity or intimate         parts, without that person™s consent.    (d) The distribution of images, including video or photograph,        or audio of another person™s sexual activity or intimate         parts, if the individual distributing the images or audio        knows or should have known that the person depicted in           the images or audio did not consent to the disclosure.    (e) The viewing of another person™s sexual activity or intimate         parts, in a place where that other person would have a         reasonable expectation of privacy, without that person™s         consent, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual         desire.    16.2 Limitation on Claiming Consent as a Defense to Sexual  HarassmentWhen a consensual personal relationship arises and a power differential  exists, Caltech does not consider consent as a defense to a claim of sexual harassment. The individual in the relationship with greater power  will be held responsible.  17.0 Additional Conduct Prohibited by Caltech This section lists and describes additional misconduct prohibited  by Caltech, and under applicable law, but that is not subject to the  Procedures for Complaints of Sexual Misconduct.  Complaints of  such prohibited conduct will be addressed under the Procedures for  Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation.      17.1 Prohibition on Sex- or Gender-Based Discrimination  Sex and gender-based discrimination constitutes prohibited con -duct under this policy.    Sex discrimination under Title IX occurs when a person in the  United States, on the basis of sex, is excluded from participation in,  or is denied the benefits of, or is subjected to discrimination, under  any Caltech education program or activity. The term ﬁeducation  program or activityﬂ encompasses all of the operations of Caltech.   General Information85   Sex- or gender-based discrimination also includes unfavor -able treatment on the basis of sex, gender, gender identity, gen -der expression, and sexual orientation.    Gender expression means a person™s gender-related appear -ance and behavior, whether or not stereotypically associated  with the person™s assigned sex at birth.     17.2 Prohibition on Sexual and Gender-Based Harassment  Gender-based harassment is harassment based on an individ -ual™s actual or perceived sex, gender, gender identity, or gender  expression, including harassing or bullying conduct based on  the individual™s gender expression, gender identity, transgender  status, gender transition, or nonconformity with sex stereotypes.       17.3 Prohibition on Relationships between Employees and   Undergraduates   This policy prohibits sexual or romantic relationships between  an undergraduate student and a faculty member, postdoctor -al scholar, or staff member. Any Responsible Employee who  becomes aware of such a relationship is expected to report it  immediately to the Title IX Coordinator. The non-undergraduate  party in the relationship will be held responsible for prohibited  conduct violating this policy, regardless of whether a complaint  is filed.     17.4 Prohibition on Evaluative Responsibilities in Certain   Circumstances  Even when relationships are consensual, care must be taken to  eliminate the potential for harassment or other conflicts.  Caltech practice, as well as more general ethical principles, prohibits  individuals from participating in evaluating the work or academ -ic performance of those with whom they have romantic and/ or sexual relationships, or from making hiring, salary, or similar  decisions regarding those individuals. Upon learning about a  consensual relationship involving such a power differential, the  supervisor, dean, or division chair should immediately notify  the Title IX Coordinator and, in consultation with the Title IX  Coordinator, should review and remedy any direct administra -tive or academic relationship between the involved individuals.  The individual with greater power may be subject to disciplinary  action for a violation of this prohibition.      17.5 Prohibition on Inequitable Treatment Stemming from     Consensual Relationships Even when relationships are consensual, care must be taken  to eliminate the potential for harassment or other conflicts.  If a consensual relationship exists, it is not acceptable to treat the  individual in the relationship more favorably than other similarly  situated individuals in the context of employment or academic performance. Institute Policies86    17.6 Prohibition on Uncompleted Attempts or Threats of    Prohibited Conduct To the extent that uncompleted attempts or threats of prohibited  conduct are not covered in Sections 15.0 and 16.0 of this policy,  they are covered in Section 17.0.  Threats of prohibited conduct  may also constitute retaliation under this policy.       17.7 General Caution about Maintaining Appropriate Professional    Boundaries  All members of the Caltech community should maintain respect -ful and professional boundaries with one another.  This is par -ticularly important when Caltech employees, whether faculty,  postdoctoral scholars, or staff, interact with their subordinates,  or with graduate and undergraduate students, due to the power  differential that exists between them.      While certain conduct may not constitute prohibited conduct,  it can create situations where students or others feel uncomfort -able but reluctant to voice that sentiment.  Depending on the  circumstances, such situations may include hosting students  at private homes, sharing lodging on academic-related trips  (e.g., conferences, field trips), wearing swimsuits (e.g., marine  research outing), and any interaction where alcohol is consumed  (e.g., dinners at conferences, field trips, holiday parties).      Caltech encourages employees and other community mem-bers to think carefully about maintaining appropriate professional  boundaries at all times, to state their boundaries as appropriate,  and to consider seeking guidance from the Title Coordinator.   18.0 Examples of Prohibited Conduct The following illustrative examples are provided to help prevent inap -propriate behavior and are not evidence that similar allegations would  automatically constitute that particular type of prohibited conduct.  The  examples below may constitute prohibited conduct, depending on the  specific facts and circumstances.  18.1 Sex- or Gender-Based Discrimination       gay and some of the team who would be reporting to them    strike you as somewhat conservative and you worry that the   employee might not feel comfortable supervising them      students feel uncomfortable with the student™s openness    about their recent gender transition     opined that the candidate™s voice and mannerisms are too    high-pitched and animated to be perceived as sufficiently    professional and authoritative to run a lab effectively      cannot wear makeup or wear feminine clothing in the wor   placeGeneral Information87 18.2 Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment      work group email list       Institute housing or on a  work computer station where    others can view it     jokes of a gender-based or sexual nature       sex, gender or gender identity, gender expression, or sexua    orientation, or because they objected to harassing behavior     body, using sexually degrading words to describe an    individual    communications     sexual nature      sexual activity         18.3 Sexual Exploitation     another to observe, record, view, or distribute intimate or    sexual images of another individual without that individual™s    consent    highly personal activities, whether by physical proximity or    electronic means, live or by a camera, such as watching a    person undressing, showering, or engaging in sexual activity     alcohol or drugs in order to make another person vulnerable    to any degree of sexual activity      means    or payment      trust for sexual purposes   18.4 Stalking    contact, telephone calls, voice messages, emails, text   messages, postings on social networking sites, written   letters, or gifts      networking sites or other websites  Institute Policies88   public records, online searches, going through the garbage,    or contacting the person™s family, friends, or co-workers       or internet sites       including phones or computers    or peeping    like classrooms, residence, workplace, or other places    frequented by the person        in any of the above conduct    and report on the person™s   whereabouts and activities 19.0 Informational Resources Information on prohibited conduct, as well as copies of Caltech™s  Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct; Nondiscrimination and Equal  Employment Opportunity; Unlawful Harassment; and Violence  Prevention policies are available from the following resources:  At Campus: Caltech™s Title IX Coordinator and deputy Title IX  Coordinators, Caltech™s EEO Coordinators, Human Resources,  Student Affairs, the Deans™ Offices, the Caltech Center for  Inclusion and Diversity, Resident Associates, the Staff and  Faculty Consultation Center, and Employee and Organizational  Development. At JPL: JPL™s deputy Title IX Coordinator, EEO Coordinator, and  Human Resources Business Partners.  The policies are published in the Caltech Catalog and on the follow -ing Caltech and JPL websites: JPL Human Resources, Equity and Title  IX Office, and Student Affairs.  Related Policies and Procedures:   Misconduct under Title IX   Harassment, and Retaliation  General Information89PROCEDURES FOR RESPONDING TO AND RESOLVING  COMPLAINTS OF GENDER-BASED MISCONDUCTI. Introduction and Scope Caltech™s Sex and Gender-based Misconduct Policy reflects Caltech™s  commitment to support and encourage individuals who have been sub-jected to prohibited conduct to come forward. Caltech takes all allega -tions of prohibited conduct seriously and responds appropriately Caltech will take prompt and appropriate action to address  all reports of prohibited conduct in a fair and impartial manner.  Complainants, respondents, and all other participants in the process  will be treated with dignity, care, and respect. Caltech™s policy and these procedures are intended to ensure that  individuals accused of engaging in prohibited conduct are not pre -judged; that they have notice and a full and fair opportunity to respond  to allegations before findings and conclusions are reached; and that  decisions are based on the evidence gathered in a process that is  fair to both complainants and respondents when an investigation is  conducted. Caltech will conduct a fair, impartial, timely, and thorough  investigation that provides all parties with appropriate due process.  These Procedures are to be applied to address allegations of pro -hibited conduct that (a) fall within the scope, as set out in Section I, 2.0, of the Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, and (b) fall  within the definitions of sexual harassment, as defined by Title IX and the California Education Code and set out in Sections 15.0 or 16.0,  respectively, of the Caltech Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy  (Policy).  All other prohibited conduct under the Policy is addressed  under the Procedures for Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment,  and Retaliation. The Title IX Coordinator determines whether these  Procedures apply.   Throughout these Procedures, any reference to a Caltech or JPL  administrator is understood to include not only that administrator but also their designee. II. RetaliationRetaliation against any member of the Caltech community at any point in time for making a good-faith report of prohibited conduct or par -ticipating or refusing to participate in any manner in an investigation,  proceeding, or hearing conducted by Caltech or a state or federal  agency, is strictly prohibited. Retaliation is defined as overt or covert  acts of reprisal, interference, discrimination, intimidation, or harassment  against an individual or group for exercising their rights under Title IX or  other federal and state laws. Threats of retaliatory action also constitute  retaliation.  Retaliation violates this policy and is unlawful.  Caltech will maintain the confidentiality of persons involved in reports and complaints of prohibited conduct, except as required or  allowed under the Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, these  procedures, the Unlawful Harassment Policy and related procedures, or  federal or state law.  The following actions do not constitute retaliation: the exercise of  Institute Policies90rights protected under applicable law; or charging an individual with a  code of conduct violation for making a materially false statement in bad faith in the course of a resolution process. However, a determination  that a respondent was or was not responsible for alleged prohibited  conduct, alone, is not sufficient to conclude that any party made a  materially false statement in bad faith.Allegations of retaliation that are alleged at the time of a formal  complaint of sexual harassment, as defined in Policy Sections 15.0 and 16.0. will be addressed as part of that complaint.   Complaints of retal -iation that are not alleged at the time of a sexual harassment complaint  will be addressed under the Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful  Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation. The Title IX Coordinator  will have the ultimate discretion over which procedures apply to a claim  of retaliation. III. Adviser or Support PersonThe complainant and respondent may have an adviser or support  person (hereinafter, collectively, ﬁadviserﬂ) of their choice (other than  a witness) accompany and generally support them at any virtual or live meetings or phone calls at any point in the procedures discussed  below. However, Caltech resolution processes, including the inves -tigation process, are not legal proceedings and the adviser may not  speak or submit written statements on behalf of the individual they are  advising (other than at the hearing as described below in Section XIII(D)(8)). Caltech will be responsible for communicating information to advis -ers, or scheduling meetings around advisers™ availability, except to the  extent required to comply with Section XIII(D)(8) of these Procedures.  Advisers are required to sign and abide by Caltech™s Adviser Policy and  Confidentiality Agreement setting forth the parameters of their role.  The role of the adviser is to (a) provide general support to a party  participating in any step of the processes outlined below, (b) encourage  the party whom the adviser supports to communicate for themself, and (c) respect the process and procedures.  All communications, whether  oral or written, will be between the Equity and Title IX Office staff mem -ber(s), investigator(s), or other appropriate participating administrator(s),  or their designees, (ﬁTitle IX process administratorsﬂ), and the party  only.  The adviser may not speak during any meeting, including on  behalf of the party whom they support, ask questions of the adminis-trator(s) or of the party whom they support, or otherwise interfere with  or disrupt the meeting, conversation, or procedure.  Nor may an adviser  communicate on behalf of the party in emails or other correspondence  with the Equity and Title IX Office.  However, during meetings, the  adviser may provide written notes or instructions to the party whom  they support.  All parties have the right to consult with an attorney, at their own  expense, at any procedural step set forth below, if they wish to do so.   An attorney may serve, but is not required to serve, as an adviser.   Caltech is not required to identify or provide advisers or support per -sons to parties, except as provided below in Section XIII(D)(8).   General Information91IV.  TimelinesThese procedures set forth reasonably prompt time frames for major  procedural stages.   The Title IX Coordinator, at their own discretion or upon the request  of a party or witness, may extend a time frame for good cause, provid -ing prompt written notice to the parties of any delays or extensions and  the reasons therefor.  Good cause may include but is not limited to the absence of a party,  a party™s adviser, or a witness; concurrent law enforcement activity;  the need for language assistance or accommodation of disabilities; the breadth and scope of the allegations, in terms of content and date, the  number of potential witnesses, the amount of available, relevant doc -umentary evidence; the need to conduct a thorough, fair and accurate  investigation; and office closures.   The Title IX Coordinator shall not unreasonably deny a party™s  request for an extension of a deadline related to a complaint during  periods of examinations or school closures.   V.  Initial Title IX AssessmentWithin 14 days of receiving a report of prohibited conduct, Caltech™s  Title IX Coordinator will make an initial assessment of the report to  determine the following:1. a reasonable assessment of any safety concerns posed to any  member of the Caltech community or Caltech™s campus; 2. whether the allegations on their face present a potential viola -tion of the Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, and if  so, whether they are covered under these procedures or under  Caltech™s Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation  procedures; or, if not, whether they should be addressed under a  different Caltech policy and process;  3. whether and what supportive measures are warranted; and 4. whether emergency removal is warranted. The Title IX Coordinator or their designee will promptly reach out to  each identifiable complainant or alleged victim of the report to inform  them, as appropriate, of the receipt of the report, discuss the availabil -ity of supportive measures, consider their wishes with respect to sup -portive measures, inform them that supportive measures are available  with or without the filing of a formal complaint, and explain to them the process for filing a formal complaint.  Where a crime may have  occurred, the Title IX Coordinator will provide the complainant/alleged  victim notice of their right, but not the obligation, to report the matter  to law enforcement and information on how Caltech can help facilitate  such reporting.  The Title IX Coordinator will also describe how Caltech  responds to reports of prohibited conduct, as well as potential disci -plinary consequences.  The Title IX Coordinator will also refer them to  and help coordinate, if desired, support resources.  Finally, the Title IX  Coordinator will request for the complainant/alleged victim to meet with  them to discuss options for responding to the report. The Title IX Coordinator may also meet with the respondent and  other relevant individuals in order to make an initial assessment. The  Institute Policies92respondent also will be offered the opportunity to request and receive  supportive measures at this time. The complainant and the respondent will be provided with the fol -lowing:  Gender-Based Misconduct or Unlawful Harassment policies and  related procedures as appropriate, and copies of these docu -ments resources and services, including contact information and days  and hours of availability, as well as information on coordination  with law enforcement   -dence preservation   or participating in a complaint process VI. Supportive Measures Supportive measures are non-disciplinary, nonpunitive individualized  services offered as appropriate and reasonably available to the par -ties before or after the filing of a formal complaint or where no formal  complaint has been made or no investigation has been undertaken. Supportive measures are available to parties regardless of whether  they participate in a resolution process.  They are designed to restore  or preserve equal access to Caltech™s education program or activity  without unreasonably burdening the other party, including measures  designed to protect the safety of all parties or Caltech™s educational  environment, or to deter prohibited conduct.  Supportive measures may include counseling, academic accom -modations (e.g., extensions of deadlines, course-related adjustments),  modifications of work or class schedules, campus escort services, mutual restrictions on contact between the parties, including in a vir -tual or electronic  environment, changes in work or housing locations,  leaves of absence, increased security and monitoring of certain areas  of campus, referrals to campus and off-campus support resources, and  other similar measures. Caltech will maintain as confidential any sup -portive measures provided to any party to the extent such confidential -ity does not impair Caltech™s ability to provide the supportive measures  (e.g., notifying appropriate administrators involved in academic accom -modations). The Title IX Coordinator will coordinate the effective imple -mentation of supportive measures.  Supportive measures affecting faculty, postdoctoral scholars and  staff, including employees at JPL, might include transfer of supervi -sory or evaluative responsibility regarding grading, supervision, tenure  review, letters of recommendation, and/or changes to office assign -ments. Caltech will endeavor to minimize the burden on the party receiving  supportive measures without unreasonably burdening the other party.  If a complainant wishes to seek a temporary restraining order or similar  judicial order, Caltech will help the complainant with that process.  The imposition of supportive measures is not indicative of a determi -General Information93nation of responsibility or any other outcome. These measures may be  modified at any time and may be kept in place after a final investigative decision is reached. All parties are expected to comply with any supportive measures  that may be imposed. Failure to comply with supportive measures may  be grounds for disciplinary action. A party may be subject to discipline  under the appropriate Caltech policy for failure to comply with a sup -portive measure even if they are found not responsible for the underly -ing report of prohibited conduct. NOTE: The Institute may undertake remedies and systemic remedies  set forth below in Section XIII(D)(9) (Potential Sanction, Remedies, and Systemic Remedies), as appropriate and consistent with the require -ments of Title IX and this Section VI, to safeguard a complainant™s  access to education, at any time.  The complainant™s engagement in a  resolution process is not a prerequisite for such action by Caltech.   VII. Emergency Removal The Title IX Coordinator will undertake an individualized safety and risk  analysis for the purpose of determining whether the respondent, based  on the alleged conduct, is an immediate threat to the physical health  or safety of any student or other individual, justifying their removal. The  Title IX Coordinator may consult with any individuals they consider per -tinent and appropriate to making the emergency removal determination.  The safety and risk factors that the Title IX Coordinator will consider  include but are not limited to the nature of the allegations, the alleged  number and age of the complainant(s), the power differential between  the respondent and complainant(s), whether the respondent is alleged  to have used a weapon, violence, drugs, or alcohol to intimidate, harm, or control a complainant, and whether the allegations present a pattern  of behavior or otherwise suggest a likelihood of repeated misconduct.  Where the Title IX Coordinator has determined that emergency  removal of a student respondent is appropriate, the respondent will  be provided with notice and an opportunity to challenge the decision  immediately following the removal. To challenge a removal decision by  the Title IX Coordinator, the respondent must submit a written appeal to  the associate vice president for human resources within seven (7) cal -endar days of receipt of notice. In deciding this appeal, the associate  vice president for human resources may consult with any individuals  they consider pertinent and appropriate to making the decision.  The  decision of the associate vice president for human resources is final.   Caltech may place nonstudent employee respondents on adminis -trative leave while a complaint resolution process is pending. VIII. Complainant™s Ability to Exercise Options With respect to allegations of prohibited conduct under the Sex- and  Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, the Title IX Coordinator and deputy  coordinators make every effort to respect the concerns and goals of  complainants, as well as their capacity to make independent choices regarding resolution options for addressing their complaints under the  Policy and these Procedures.  Institute Policies94In instances where a complainant requests that their name not  be used, that Caltech not pursue any action against the respondent,  including an investigation, or that no disciplinary action be taken, Caltech will seriously consider the request but weigh the request  against Caltech™s responsibilities, including under applicable laws, to  take action to provide a safe, nonthreatening, and nondiscriminatory  environment for all community members, including the complainant.  The Title IX Coordinator will discuss with the complainant the reasons  for their requests and attempt to address the underlying concerns,  such as taking steps to prevent retaliation.  Where the complainant remains committed to the requests men -tioned above, the Title IX Coordinator will weigh the request against  factors that may lead the Title IX Coordinator to take action on behalf  of Caltech, which may be contrary to the wishes of the complainant, including potentially disclosing the complainant™s name and/or pro -ceeding to an investigation, to protect the health and safety of the  complainant and the Caltech community. The factors considered are  within the discretion of the Title IX Coordinator and include, but are not  limited to, the nature and seriousness of the alleged conduct, whether  the allegations are contested, the involvement of multiple respondents,  the existence of multiple or prior reports of misconduct against the  respondent, whether there was a weapon, physical restraints, battery,  or other violence involved, whether the use of alcohol or drugs to induce vulnerability to sexual activity without consent was allegedly involved, whether there is evidence of a pattern of conduct, the pres -ence of other circumstances that suggest there is a significant risk  that the respondent will commit further acts of prohibited conduct,  the age of a complainant, whether the respondent is a faculty or staff  member with oversight of students, whether there is a power imbalance  between the complainant and respondent, whether the complainant  believes that the complainant will be less safe if the complainant™s  name is disclosed or an investigation is conducted, and whether Caltech is able to conduct a thorough investigation and obtain relevant  evidence in the absence of the complainant™s cooperation. If Caltech determines that it can honor the student™s request for  confidentiality, it shall still take reasonable steps to respond to the  complaint, consistent with the request, to limit the effects of the alleged  prohibited conduct and prevent its recurrence without initiating formal  action against the alleged respondent or revealing the identity of the  complainant. These steps may include increased monitoring, supervi -sion, or security at locations or activities where the alleged misconduct  occurred; providing additional training and education materials for stu -dents and employees; or conducting climate surveys regarding sexual  violence. The institution shall also take immediate steps to provide for  the safety of the complainant while keeping the complainant™s identity  confidential as appropriate. These steps may include changing living  arrangements or course schedules, assignments, or tests. The com-plainant shall be notified that the steps Caltech will take to respond to  the complaint will be limited by the request for confidentiality. If Caltech determines that it must disclose the complainant™s identity  to the respondent or proceed with an investigation, it shall inform the  General Information95complainant prior to making this disclosure or initiating the investiga -tion. The complainant is not required to participate in the ensuing pro -cess.  Caltech shall also take immediate steps to provide for the safety  of the complainant where appropriate. In the event the complainant  requests that Caltech inform the respondent that the student asked  Caltech not to investigate or seek discipline, Caltech shall honor this request. If the complaint includes allegations that may constitute a possible crime, the Title IX Coordinator will notify the complainant of their right  to file a criminal complaint or to choose not to notify law enforcement.  The Title IX Coordinator, depending on facts and circumstances,  may also elect to file a formal complaint and initiate an investigation even if the complainant does not have standing to do so.  All final determinations and decisions taken under this provision  10.0, except the complainant™s decision to file a criminal complaint or  to choose not to notify law enforcement, rest solely with the Title IX  Coordinator.  IX. Filing a Formal ComplaintIn order to exercise resolution options for addressing and resolv -ing complaints of alleged prohibited conduct covered under these  Procedures, the complainant must file a formal complaint document  with the Title IX Coordinator in person or by regular or electronic mail  requesting that Caltech initiate a complaint resolution process. The  document must contain the complainant™s physical or digital signature  or otherwise indicate that the complainant is the person filing the for-mal complaint.  At the time of filing a formal complaint, a complainant must be par-ticipating in or attempting to participate in an education program or  activity of Caltech. The term ﬁattempting to participateﬂ includes when a complainant has: (a) applied for admission; (b) graduated but intends to apply for a new program; (c) graduated but intends to participate in  alumni programs and activities; (d) gone on leave but is still enrolled; (e)  gone on leave but intends to re-apply after the leave; or (f) withdrawn  due to alleged sexual harassment and expresses a desire to re-enroll if  Caltech responds appropriately to the allegations.   The term ﬁeducation program or activityﬂ includes buildings or other  locations that are part of Caltech™s operations, including remote learn -ing platforms; (b) locations, events, or circumstances, even if off-cam -pus, over which Caltech exercised substantial control over both the  respondent and the context in which the alleged sexual harassment  occurred; and (c) any building, even if off-campus, owned or controlled  by a student organization that is officially recognized by Caltech. However, even if a complainant is not qualified to bring a formal  complaint, the respondent is outside the jurisdiction of Caltech™s pol -icy, or the alleged prohibited conduct took place outside of Caltech™s  educational programs and activities, if there is any reason to believe  that the alleged prohibited conduct could contribute to a hostile edu -cational environment, interfere with a student™s access to education, or  otherwise compromise the safety of the Caltech community, Caltech  Institute Policies96will still take prompt action, as warranted and appropriate, to provide  for the safety and well-being of the individual reporting and the cam -pus community, including taking reasonable steps to stop and remedy  the effects of the prohibited conduct and to prevent recurrence of the  behavior.  This may include the Title IX Coordinator™s initiating a formal  complaint under their own authority on Caltech™s behalf. Where the Title IX Coordinator initiates activity under their own  authority, as authorized under Policy Section 10.0 and reiterated above  in Section VIII of these Procedures, the formal complaint requirements  must still be met. X. Consolidation of Formal ComplaintsThe Title IX Coordinator may consolidate formal complaints of allega -tions covered under these procedures against more than one respon -dent, or by more than one complainant against one or more respon -dents, or by one party against the other party, where the allegations  arise out of the same facts or circumstances.  XI. Notice of AllegationsUpon receiving a formal complaint, within fourteen (14) calendar days,  the Title IX Coordinator must provide written notice to the parties of the  following, with sufficient time for the partiesŠgenerally fourteen (14)  calendar daysŠ to prepare a response before any initial interview: 1. resolution processes set out below; 2. allegations, including sufficient details known at the time, includ -ing the identities of the parties involved in the incident, if known, the misconduct alleged, and the date and location of the alleged incident, if known; 3. alleged institute policy violations under review; 4. procedures that will be used; 5. statement that the respondent is presumed not responsible for  the alleged misconduct (i.e., innocent) and that a determination regarding responsibility is made at the conclusion of an inves -tigation process or by an administrative resolution in which the  respondent takes responsibility for the alleged misconduct; 6. that the parties may have an adviser of their choice, who may be, but is not required to be, an attorney, accompany them at  any stage of the process; 7. that the parties may review and inspect evidence under an  investigation process; and that knowingly making false state -ments or submitting false information is prohibited and may sub -ject the offending party to discipline 8. information regarding appropriate counseling and other support  resources developed and maintained by the Institute 9. copies of the Policy and pertinent procedures Any new allegations that arise during the course of the investigation that could subject either party to new or additional sanctions shall be subject to these same notice requirements.   General Information97XII. Dismissal of a Formal ComplaintUpon receiving a formal complaint, within fourteen (14) calendar days,  the Title IX Coordinator must dismiss the complaint for resolution under  these procedures if the conduct alleged does not constitute sexual  harassment, as defined either under Title IX (Policy Section 15.0) or the CA Education Code (Policy Section 16.0).  If the conduct alleged does not fall under either section, the Title IX Coordinator, if appropriate,  will refer the allegations for resolution under other appropriate Caltech  policies and procedures, including the Unlawful Harassment Policy and  related procedures.  The Title IX Coordinator may also dismiss a formal complaint or  allegations therein if at any time during a resolution process a com -plainant notifies the Title IX Coordinator in writing that they would like  to withdraw their complaint or certain allegations; if the respondent is  no longer enrolled or employed at Caltech; or if specific circumstances  prevent Caltech from gathering evidence sufficient to reach a determi -nation as to the complaint or certain allegations.  The Title IX Coordinator will promptly and simultaneously send  written notice to the parties of any dismissal and the reason(s) for the  dismissal. The parties may submit an appeal of any dismissal decision, in writ-ing, to the associate vice president of human resources, within seven  (7) calendar days of receiving the dismissal decision.  This appeal of a dismissal of a formal complaint, or of certain allega-tions therein, is limited to one or more of the following grounds: a pro -cedural irregularity that affected the dismissal decision; new evidence  (including a new witness) that was not reasonably available at the time  of the dismissal decision that could affect that decision; and the Title  IX Coordinator, investigator(s), or decision maker(s) had a conflict of  interest or bias for or against complainants or respondents generally  or the individual complainant or respondent that affected the dismissal  decision. If a party submits an appeal of a dismissal, the other party will have the opportunity to submit a written response to the appeal within ten  (10) calendar days of the filing of the appeal. The parties simultaneous-ly will be informed, in writing, of the outcome of the appeal. The appeal decision letter will state the rationale for the result. Appeal decisions  are final.  Even where dismissal of a formal complaint occurs, the Title IX  Coordinator may still provide supportive measures to parties or take  other appropriate action in response to alleged concerns.   XIII. Resolution Options The outcomes of each of the three options set out belowŠthe rem -edy-based resolution, the administrative resolution, and the investi -gation, subject to any appeal processŠare considered final. In other  words, once one option has concluded, a party may no longer exercise  another option regarding the same alleged conduct. However, a party  may elect to raise or pursue another option before the option currently  being pursued has concluded. Institute Policies98Under any of the three options, remedies must be designed to  restore or preserve equal access to Caltech™s education program or  activity. They may include actions that qualify as supportive measures,  but unlike supportive measures, remedies may include actions that are  disciplinary, punitive, or burden the other party.  Any person designated by Caltech to facilitate any of the resolution  processes set out below (e.g., Title IX Coordinator, investigators, deci -sion maker, administrators who determine sanctions and remedies,  administrator hearing an appeal of an outcome of an investigation process) may not have a conflict of interest or bias for or against  complainants or respondents generally or an individual complainant  or respondent. Parties will be provided an opportunity at appropriate  junctures in a process to object to a person carrying out a facilitation  role in the process for the consideration and decision of the Title IX  Coordinator on the grounds of a conflict of interest or bias. Where an  objection is made about the Title IX Coordinator, the decision as to  their suitability will be made by the associate vice president for human  resources.  Any consideration of impartiality, or objections based on conflict  of interest or bias, of those involved in Title IX processes must be  reviewed with thoughtful consideration of individual circumstances.  Determination of whether a conflict of interest or bias exists in a partic -ular instance will be a matter of judgment involving all the material facts of the situation.   In addition, any person designated by Caltech to facilitate any of the resolution processes set out below (e.g., Title IX Coordinator, investi -gators, decision maker, administrators who determine sanctions and  remedies, administrator hearing an appeal of an outcome of an investi -gation process) will receive training appropriate to their role.   The Administrative Resolution process and the Remedy-Based  Resolution process are available only at the discretion of the Title IX  Coordinator under circumstances they deem appropriate. Civil law rem -edies may also be available to complainants.  A. Administrative ResolutionThe Title IX Coordinator, with the voluntary written consent of the  parties, may offer the opportunity to resolve the complaint by admin -istrative resolution. Administrative resolution (AR) provides an oppor -tunity for the respondent to accept responsibility for their alleged  conduct and proceed to a resolution without a formal investigation.  Complainants and respondents participating in this process may have  an adviser of their choice accompany them when engaging in this reso -lution process, as set forth above in Section III.  If the AR option is agreed to by a complainant, the Title IX  Coordinator will meet with the respondent to review the allegations.  The Title IX Coordinator will provide the respondent with information on  the respondent™s rights and options under the policy and these proce -dures.  The Title IX Coordinator will also provide the respondent with  written materials outlining information on campus support resources  and services, including their contact information and days and hours of availability.  General Information99The Title IX Coordinator will offer the respondent the opportunity  to resolve the complaint by AR by accepting responsibility for the  alleged conduct. It is the respondent™s option and decision whether  to do so.  If the respondent elects to acknowledge that the alleged  conduct occurred and takes responsibility for the alleged conduct, the  respondent will sign a written acknowledgement, and the matter will be  referred to the appropriate decision maker for a decision concerning  sanctions and remedies that may be appropriate.  Generally, for purposes of determining sanctions in connection  with an AR, the decision maker shall be determined based upon the respondent™s affiliation (the vice provost of research or administration  for faculty, the assistant vice president for human resources for post -doctoral scholars and campus staff, or the deputy director for Human  Resources at JPL for JPL employees). In the case of student respon -dents, the appropriate dean will serve as the decision maker.  In determining sanctions and remedies, decision makers will consult  with the Title IX Coordinator and may consult with any other individual  they deem appropriate.  The parties will both be notified simultaneously in writing of the resolution, including any sanctions and remedies. Within ten (10) cal -endar days of receiving this letter, either party may appeal in writing  only on the grounds that the sanction is substantially disproportionate  to the acknowledged prohibited conduct.  Appeals shall be submitted  and resolved by the following administrators based upon the respon -dent™s affiliation: the provost for faculty, the associate vice president for  human resources for postdoctoral scholars and campus staff, the vice  president of student affairs for students, and the director for human  resources at JPL for JPL employees.  In assessing appeals, these  administrators may consult with any individual they deem appropriate.   Appeal decisions are final.   An AR process will be concluded within a reasonably prompt time  frame after the complaint has been made, generally forty-five (45) calendar days. The Title IX Coordinator will keep the parties informed  of the status of the process. The Title IX Coordinator may delay the  process temporarily or extend the time frame for good cause, provid -ing written notice to the parties of any delays or extensions and the reasons therefor. Good cause may include, but is not limited to the  absence of a party or a party™s adviser; the need for language assis -tance or accommodation of disabilities; the breadth and scope of the  allegations and number of parties; and office closures.  An AR is the final resolution of the allegations contained therein.  B. Remedy-Based ResolutionThe RBR is not available to resolve allegations made by a student of  Title IX-covered prohibited conduct set out in Section 15.0 of the Policy  against a Caltech employee.  A remedy-based resolution (RBR) is a mutual agreement entered  into among Caltech and the parties to a formal complaint. Depending on the allegations and circumstances, a respondent agrees to under -take, or all parties agree to undertake, certain social, academic, and/ or administrative steps, on a certain timeline, as a means of resolv -Institute Policies100General Information.ing a complaint of prohibited conduct without an investigation and a  finding regarding responsibility or discipline against a respondent. All  parties must voluntarily agree to all the terms of the RBR as the com -plete and final resolution of the formal complaint(s). In other words, if  an agreement is reached, the complainant cannot subsequently file  a formal complaint for an investigation regarding the same alleged  conduct, unless a respondent does not fulfill their agreed upon com -mitments under the RBR as determined by the Title IX Coordinator.   Complainants and respondents participating in this process may have  an adviser of their choice accompany them when engaging in this reso -lution process, as set forth above in Section III.  Key aspects of an RBR include that it:      unlike an investigation process, there are no circumstances    (e.g., safety of a minor, safety of a party or the community)    under which Caltech can undertake this process against the    wishes of a party      underlying the alleged prohibited conduct. For example,    under an RBR, a respondent can agree to undertake a cou    seling and/or education program to address behavioral    issues. In an investigation process, a decision maker cannot    compel counseling as part of the sanction;      measures and remedies undertaken by the respondent,    allowing the complainant to focus on remedying specific    social, academic, or administrative concerns;      an investigation at any time during the negotiation process,    or if the parties ultimately cannot come to a mutually   acceptable agreement or if a party fails to comply with any or    all of their commitments under an executed RBR as   determined by the Title IX Coordinator;      agreement is reached; and      potential finding of responsibility against the respondent. In cases in which the Title IX Coordinator determines an RBR may  be appropriate, the Title IX Coordinator will discuss with a complainant  potential elements of an RBR pertinent to their concerns and allega -tions to help them determine whether an RBR is an option they wish to pursue. If all parties to a formal complaint are agreeable to pursuing  a resolution through the RBR process, and provide voluntary written  consent to engage in the RBR process, the Title IX Coordinator will  work with the parties to negotiate and craft the agreement. The parties  do not engage directly with one another.  The Title IX Coordinator, with  the consent of the parties, may seek the assistance of academic and administrative leadership, as appropriate, to make possible and imple -ment elements of the agreement.  There are certain situations, however, where the Title IX Coordinator  may determine that the parties™ ability to discuss and reach a resolution  101Institute Policiesof the concerns requires intervention and facilitation by a third-party  mediator outside the Caltech community. If the parties agree to work  with a mediator, the Title IX Coordinator will make the arrangements.  The decision to use a third-party mediator is within the sole discretion  of the Title IX Coordinator.  Potential elements of an RBR agreement include, but are not lim -ited to, counseling or substance abuse treatment for a respondent;  training for a respondent provided by the Title IX Coordinator and/or  other resources; and other supportive measures, as described above in  Section VI.An RBR process culminating in a signed agreement will be con -cluded within a reasonably prompt time frame after the complaint  has been made, generally forty-five (45) calendar days. The Title IX Coordinator will keep the parties informed of the status of the process.  The Title IX Coordinator may delay the process temporarily or extend  the time frame for good cause, providing written notice to the parties  of any delays or extensions and the reasons therefor. Good cause may  include, but is not limited to the absence of a party or a party™s adviser;  the need for language assistance or accommodation of disabilities; the number of parties; and office closures.  If the process does not result in a resolution within a reasonable  amount of time, the Title IX Coordinator will terminate the process, and  the parties may pursue the other resolution options.  A remedy-based resolution is the final resolution of the allegations  it addresses, unless a party fails to carry out their commitments under  the agreement, as determined by the Title IX Coordinator.  C. Facilitation of Administrative Resolution or Remedy-Based Resolution During Investigation ProcessAt any time following the filing of a formal complaint, including during an investigation process, prior to reaching a final determination  regarding responsibility, inclusive of any appeal process, the Title IX  Coordinator may facilitate an administrative resolution (AR) or a reme -dy-based resolution (RBR), if determined to be appropriate, provided  that the Title IX Coordinator: 1. Provides to the parties written notice disclosing the allegations,  the requirements, and consequences of the AR or RBR process,  including that: (a) completing either resolution precludes the par -ties from initiating or resuming a formal complaint arising from  the same allegations; (b) at any time prior to completing the AR or RBR process, either party has the right to withdraw and initi -ate or resume the investigation process; and (c) notice of records  that will be maintained or could be shared and with whom.  2. Obtains the parties™ voluntary written consent to the AR or RBR process. 102General InformationD.   Investigation Process1. IntroductionThis option provides both parties with an investigation and adjudica -tion of the allegations. The investigation and adjudication of alleged prohibited conduct under this section is not an adversarial process  between the complainant, the respondent and the witnesses, but rather  a process by which Caltech complies with its obligations under existing  law.  The complainant does not have the burden to prove, nor does the  respondent have the burden to disprove, the allegations of prohibited  conduct.  If the decision maker determines that a preponderance of the  evidence substantiates alleged prohibited conduct and a violation of  the Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, sanctions, remedies,  or systemic remedies, as appropriate, will be imposed.  The decisions  made by the decision maker, subject to the resolution of any appeal,  represent the final resolution of the formal complaint, whether or not a  respondent is found responsible.  Caltech™s investigation will occur independently from any legal/crim -inal proceedings that may take place. Caltech may defer fact gathering  for an appropriate time during a criminal investigation. The Title IX Coordinator will assign appropriate investigator(s) to  carry out the investigation. The investigator(s) must be impartial and free of any conflict of interest. Generally, for complaints involving stu -dents, staff, or faculty, the Title IX Coordinator will refer the investiga -tion to the lead investigator and appropriate deputy Title IX Coordinator.  The Title IX Coordinator may appoint different investigator(s).  All participants in an investigation will receive a fair and impartial  process and be treated with dignity, care, and respect. Caltech™s policy  and investigation procedures are intended to ensure that individuals  reported for prohibited conduct are not prejudged and are provided  with adequate notice and an opportunity to be heard regarding the alle -gations made against them. Respondents are presumed not responsi -ble for the alleged conduct until a determination regarding responsibility  is made at the conclusion of the investigation process.   The purpose of the investigation is to gather the evidence relating to  the complaint, and decisions are based on an objective evaluation of all  relevant evidence, including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence.  Evidence may include statements from the parties and witnesses;  documents relating to the complaint, such as texts, photographs, and  emails; and physical evidence, such as clothing, rape kit evidence, and weapons. Credibility determinations may not be based on a person™s status as  a complainant, respondent, or witness.  The investigation will be trauma-informed and impartial.  Those involved in questioning parties and witnessesŠnamely, the Title IX  Coordinator and Title IX deputies, the investigators and the decision  makerŠwill receive training in conducting fair and trauma-informed  investigations and hearings.  The investigation will be treated as private to the extent possible.  Caltech administrators will be informed on a need-to-know basis. 103Institute PoliciesCaltech will make reasonable and appropriate efforts to preserve the  privacy of the parties and witnesses, and protect the confidentiality of  information. With the exception of the hearing portion of the investiga-tion process, as set out below, no meetings or conversations that take  place as part of the investigation process may be recorded by anyone.  Investigation files, including the recording of the hearing, will be main -tained by the Equity and Title IX Office. Caltech does not tolerate retaliation and will take steps to prevent  retaliation and strong responsive action if it occurs. All participants,  including complainants, respondents, and witnesses, are protected  against retaliation and will be advised to notify Caltech immediately if  retaliation occurs.  Any new allegations that arise during the course of the investigation that could subject either party to new or additional sanctions shall be subject to the notice requirements set out above in Sections V (Initial  Title IX Assessment) and XI (Notice of Allegations).  2. Limitations on QuestioningThe investigators and decision maker will not ask parties or witnesses questions that are repetitive, irrelevant, or harassing.  Consistent with  federal and state law, the investigators and the decision maker will not  ask questions or seek evidence of a complainant™s prior sexual con -duct with anyone other than the respondent, except to the extent such  questions and/or evidence are used to determine whether someone  other than the respondent committed the conduct alleged by the com -plainant. Furthermore, evidence of a prior consensual sexual, romantic,  or intimate relationship between the complainant and respondent does  not by itself imply consent or preclude a finding of prohibited conduct.  The investigators and decision maker shall not consider the existence of a dating relationship or prior or subsequent consensual sexual rela -tions between the parties unless the evidence is relevant to how the  parties communicated consent in prior or subsequent consensual sex-ual relations.  Where the investigators or decision maker allow consid -eration of evidence about a dating relationship or prior or subsequent  consensual sexual relations between the parties, the mere fact that the  parties engaged in other consensual sexual relations with one another  is never sufficient, by itself, to establish that the conduct in question  was consensual.  Before allowing the consideration of any evidence  described in this section, the investigators or decision maker shall pro -vide a written explanation to the parties as to why consideration of the evidence meets the requirements for consideration. The investigation, at any stage, will not require, allow, rely upon,  or use questions or evidence that constitute or seek the disclosure of  information protected under a legally recognized privilege (e.g., attor -ney-client, doctor-patient, clergy-penitent), unless the person holding  such privilege has waived the privilege. Questions that seek information about any party™s medical, psychological, and similar records are not  permitted unless the party has given written consent.  104General Information3. Amnesty Concerning Student Policy Violations: Complainants and  Witnesses The investigators will investigate any allegations that alcohol or drugs were involved in the incident.   A student who participates as a complainant or witness in an investi-gation of sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, or stalking will not be subject to disciplinary sanctions for a violation of Caltech™s  student conduct policies at or near the time of the incident, including but not limited to the Substance Abuse Policy, unless Caltech deter -mines that the violation was egregious, including but not limited to, an  action that places the health or safety of any other person at risk or involves conduct that violates Caltech™s policies prohibiting discrimi -nation, or other serious misconduct like plagiarism, cheating, research  misconduct, or other forms of academic dishonesty.  4. Standard of EvidenceAll decisions made in the course of this investigation process will utilize  the preponderance of evidence standard. A preponderance of evidence  means that it is more likely than not that the alleged prohibited conduct  occurred. Stated another way, it means that the likelihood the alleged  prohibited conduct occurred is any amount over 50%. The decision  maker will make a decision on the disputed facts and also decide whether the evidence makes it more likely than not that the alleged  prohibited conduct occurred based on the evidence available at the  time of the decision. When the decision maker is presented with two  different but plausible versions of alleged prohibited conduct, credibility  determinations may affect the outcome.   5. Identity of the Decision MakerThe Title IX Coordinator shall have the discretion to determine which  appropriately trained individual will serve as the decision maker in the  investigation process. As set forth below, the decision maker conducts  any hearing that takes place under these procedures.  The parties will  be notified of the identity of the decision maker before the hearing as  well as the process for objecting to the identity of the decision maker  on the basis of a conflict of interest or bias.   6. Determination of Sanctions, Remedies, and Systemic RemediesAt the conclusion of the investigation process, if there is a finding of  responsibility, the appropriate administrator will determine the appropri -ate sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies.  Generally, the appropriate administrator shall be determined  based upon the respondent™s affiliation (the vice provost for research  or administration for faculty, the assistant vice president for human  resources for postdoctoral scholars and campus staff, the deputy direc -tor for human resources at JPL for JPL employees, and the appropriate  dean for student respondents).  In determining sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies, these  administrators will consult with the Title IX Coordinator and may consult  with any other individual they deem appropriate.  105Institute Policies7. Timeline Complaints will be investigated and resolved within a reasonably  prompt time frame after the complaint has been made, generally 120  calendar days.  The Title IX Coordinator will provide the parties written updates of  the status of the investigation every thirty (30) days, including the date by which the parties shall be notified of the outcome of the investiga-tion and the deadlines and process for parties to appeal. The Title IX  Coordinator may delay the investigation process temporarily or extend  the time frame for good cause, providing prompt written notice to the  parties of any delays or extensions and the reasons therefor.  Good cause may include, but is not limited to the absence of a party, a party™s adviser, or a witness; concurrent law enforcement activ -ity; the need for language assistance or accommodation of disabilities; the breadth and scope of the allegations, in terms of content and date,  the number of potential witnesses, and the amount of available, rele -vant documentary evidence; the need to conduct a thorough, fair and  accurate investigation; and office closures.  The Title IX Coordinator  shall not unreasonably deny a party™s request for an extension of a  deadline related to a complaint during periods of examinations or  school closures.   8. Procedural Steps for Investigationa. The Title IX Coordinator initiates the investigation process with a  notification sent to both parties. This initial notification will iden-tify the assigned investigator(s) and will notify the parties of their right to and process for objecting to either of the investigator(s)  or to the Title IX Coordinator on the basis of conflict of interest  or bias. b. The complainant and respondent may have an adviser of their  choice, in accordance and subject to the requirements set out  above in Section III of these Procedures and the Adviser Policy  and Confidentiality Agreement.   c. The Title IX Coordinator or associate vice president of human  resources, as appropriate, will consider any objections by the  parties on the basis of conflict or interest or bias and determine  the Title IX Coordinator and investigator(s) for the process.  d. After a reasonable amount of time to review the notice of allega -tions and applicable policies and procedures, the parties will be  given equal opportunity to meet with the investigator(s). In those meetings, the investigator(s) will gather evidence about the alle-gations, including any documents or physical evidence. e. Throughout the process, the parties may suggest witnesses  and documents to the investigator(s) as well as questions for the investigator(s) to ask the other party and any witnesses. The investigator(s) will determine whether the suggestions are  relevant and appropriate. Caltech asks the parties to keep the  investigation private but cannot and will not prohibit the parties  from discussing the investigation with others in connection with  identifying evidence for the investigator(s) to gather.  106   The parties may not, however, engage in coercion, pressure,  undue influence, or retaliation with respect to potential witness -es or other parties in the course of identifying evidence for the investigator(s). The parties may seek guidance from the Title IX  Coordinator and the investigator(s) on avoiding these concerns.   Communications between parties and witnesses deemed to have resulted from coercion, pressure, undue influence, or retal -iation may be discounted altogether by the decision maker or may be considered by the decision maker in making credibility  determinations and weighing evidence deemed subject to the undue influence.   f. The investigator(s) will interview relevant witnesses and gather  other evidence related to the allegations, if any. Witnesses may  also submit documents or written statements to the investiga-tor(s), to supplement their in-person or video interviews. g. In addition to providing information orally during meetings with  the investigator(s), the parties may submit written statements and evidence to the investigator(s) that document their experi-ences. Written statements, however, may not wholly supplant  live face-to-face or video interviews with the investigator(s). Live face-to-face or video meetings and questioning are important to  enable the investigators to conduct a fair, thorough, and efficient  investigation. While Caltech cannot compel any party or witness, to meet with the investigator(s), appropriate due process may  require Caltech to discount any written statements, and even  information provided orally, that the investigators cannot inquire  about in an in-person or video meeting.h. The investigator(s) will prepare a draft investigation report iden -tifying the facts disputed by the parties for each allegation, as well as summarizing and identifying the relevant, related  evidence gathered, including facts relevant to the credibility of  parties or witnesses or items of evidence. The investigators will also provide appendices containing the evidence gathered.  The  complainant and respondent will be given equal opportunity to  review and respond to the investigation report. The report will  also be provided to the parties™ advisers. All those receiving  access to the report will be required to sign a non-disclosure  agreement to protect the confidentiality of the material. The  non-disclosure agreement will not prohibit the parties from dis -cussing the investigation with others in connection with identify-ing additional evidence for the investigator(s) to gather. Failure to  comply with the nondisclosure agreement on the part of a party  or their adviser may subject the appropriate party to discipline.  If an adviser violates the nondisclosure agreement it will be  grounds for excluding the adviser from further participation in the  proceedings. The parties will have at least ten (10) calendar days  to submit a written response to the report. The investigators will  determine whether the parties™ responses require any follow-up  investigatory action or an opportunity for the other party to respond.  107i. The investigator(s) will finalize the investigation report. This final -ized investigation report will be provided to the parties and their  advisers, and the decision maker at least thirty (30) calendar days before any hearing. j. Where the investigation addresses allegations that only fall within  the Policy Section 16.0, setting out conduct prohibited by the  California Education Code, Caltech will determine whether a  hearing is necessary to determine whether that alleged prohibit -ed conduct more likely than not occurred.  In making this deci -sion, Caltech will consider whether the parties elected to partic-ipate in the investigation, as well as the fact that each party had the opportunity to suggest questions for other parties and wit-nesses during the investigation.  If Caltech determines a hearing is necessary, that hearing will not involve any cross-examination  conducted directly by a party or a party™s adviser.   k. Prior to any hearing, the parties will be notified of the identity of the decision maker and will be given an opportunity to object to that individual on the basis of a conflict of interest or bias.  l. At any hearing conducted under the investigation process, the  decision maker will meet face-to-face, in person or via video, separately, with the parties, and others whom the decision  maker deems appropriate, prior to deciding how to resolve the  disputed facts, make credibility determinations, and determine  whether the allegations and any policy violations are substantiat -ed by a preponderance of the evidence.  Any hearing is private  and closed to the public.  Only the decision maker, the parties  and their advisers, witnesses, appropriate administrators, and  others determined by Caltech to be necessary to the hearing may attend.  The decision-maker will determine an appropriate  and reasonable scope and time frame for the hearing, as well as  logistical processes for the hearing, such as for making objec -tions and submitting questions.  m. The hearing will be conducted with the appropriate technology  to allow the parties to virtually observe each other™s meeting,  and any witness meetings, with the decision maker while main-taining their physical separation.  Caltech will grant the requet of  any party that the entire hearing, including cross-examination, be  held virtually.  In making this request, the party does not need to  provide a reason.  In the absence of such a request. the Title IX  Coordinator has the discretion to allow any party or witness to  appear at the hearing virtually, with technology enabling partici -pants simultaneously to see and hear each other, as appropriate.   Any requests for disability accommodations should be made  to the Title IX Coordinator and Caltech™s Accessibility Services  Specialist.  n. All of the evidence that was made available previously in the  investigation report will be made available at the hearing to give  each party equal opportunity to refer to such evidence during  the hearing.o. Before and during the hearing, the parties may submit written  questions for the lead investigator and decision maker to ask the Institute Policies108other party and any witnesses with whom the decision maker is meeting (indirect cross-examination). The parties can submit  written questions during the hearing through the appropriate  technology while maintaining their physical separation. The deci-sion maker will facilitate the questioning and may consult with the lead investigator. The decision maker will have the discretion  to exclude any question(s) that they determine inappropriate.  At  the hearing, the other party shall have the opportunity to note an objection in writing to a question posed.  Neither the decision maker nor Caltech is obligated to respond to the objection but  may consider it and must include it in the record.  The deci -sion maker shall have the authority and obligation to discard  or rephrase any question that the decision maker deems to be  repetitive, irrelevant or harassing.  In making these determina -tions, the decision maker is not bound by, but may take guid -ance from, the formal rules of evidence.   p. The parties may not introduce evidence, including witness tes -timony, at the hearing that the party did not identify during the  investigation and that was available at the time of the investiga-tion.  However, the decision maker has the discretion to accept  for good cause, or to exclude, such new evidence offered at the  hearing.  q. In addition, consistent with guidance issued by the Department of Education Office of Civil Rights, the following procedural  steps in this paragraph (r) apply only at hearings adjudicating allegations of prohibited conducted covered under Title IX  (Policy Section 15.0) and occurring, in whole or in part, on or after August 14, 2020: (i) each party™s adviser (but not the parties  themselves) may directly and orally ask the other party and any  witnesses all relevant questions and follow-up questions, includ -ing those challenging credibility (direct cross-examination); (ii)  before a party or witness answers an adviser™s direct question,  the decision maker must first determine whether the question is relevant and explain any decision to exclude a question as  not relevant or otherwise inappropriate; and (iii) for the purpose  of the hearing only, if a party does not have an adviser, Caltech  will provide without fee or charge to that party an adviser of   Caltech™s choice who may be, but is not required to be, an attor -ney, to conduct direct cross-examination on behalf of that party.     In conducting direct cross-examination of a party or witness,  the adviser of a party may ask only those questions drafted by the party whom they are advising.  The adviser may not ask  questions their party has not drafted.  The adviser, moreover,  must maintain a calm and respectful tone throughout the direct  cross-examination.  An adviser may not make objections, state -ments, or arguments during the cross-examination or otherwise  during the hearing.  The decision maker may disqualify an advis-er who does not follow these rules.  r.  The decision maker will comply, and ensure others when allowed  to ask questions comply, throughout the hearing with Section  XIII(D)(2) (Limitations on Questioning) of these Procedures. 109s. Caltech cannot compel either party, or any witness, to meet with  the decision maker at the hearing. However, if a party or witness  does not attend the hearing or, when required, refuses to submit  to direct cross-examination at the hearing, the decision maker  will not rely on any statement of that party or witness in reaching  a determination regarding the respondent™s responsibility. Police  reports, medical reports and other documents and records may  not be relied upon to the extent they contain statements of a  party or witness who has not submitted to cross-examination.   However, the term ﬁstatementsﬂ does not include, for example,  evidence such as videos or photographs of the underlying inci-dent.  The decision maker may consider texts or emails that in themselves constitute the alleged sexual harassment.  The deci-sion maker will decide what evidence may be relied upon with  respect to this paragraph (t).  The decision maker cannot draw  an inference about the determination regarding responsibility  based solely on a party™s or witness™s absence from the hearing  or refusal to answer direct cross-examination questions.  This  means, for example, that the decision maker may not make any decisions about a party™s credibility based on their decision not  to participate in a hearing or submit to cross-examination.  The  decision maker may re-evaluate the relevance of any question  a party or witness refuses to answer after the hearing has con -cluded.   If a party or witness submits to cross-examination by a par -ty™s adviser but does not answer a question posed by the deci -sion maker, the decision maker may still rely on that person™s  statements.  The decision maker may not draw any inference  about the party™s credibility in making the responsibility deter -mination based solely on a party™s refusal to answer questions  posed by the decision maker.   t. Caltech will create an audio or audio-visual recording, or tran -script, only of the hearing and make it available to the parties upon request for their inspection and review. No party, adviser,  or witness is permitted to make independent recordings of the  hearing or any other meeting or conversation that takes place under the investigation process.  u. The decision maker will resolve the disputed facts, make cred -ibility determinations and decide whether the allegations and any policy violations are substantiated by a preponderance of  the evidence. In making these decisions, the decision maker will consider the final investigation report and appendices of  evidence, the parties™ responses to the draft investigation report,  the information gathered in the hearing, and the decision mak -er™s credibility assessments of those interviewed at the hearing,  as appropriate. The potential conclusions the decision maker  can reach include but are not limited to: a violation of Caltech™s  Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy occurred; inappro -priate behavior but no violation occurred; the complaint was not  supported by the evidence; the complaint was brought without a  reasonable good-faith basis.  Institute Policies110   After making these decisions, the decision maker will meet with the appropriate administrator who will determine any  sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies,in order to brief  them on the process and factual findings and conclusions.  That administrator will be identified and will determine any sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies, if appropriate,  in accordance with Section XIII(D)(5)(Identity of the Decision  Maker), (6)(Determination of Sanctions, Remedies, and Systemic Remedies), and (9)(Potential Sanction, Remedies, and Systemic Remedies) of these Procedures.      The decision maker will notify the parties simultaneously of all of these determinations in writing. The letter will include:        of the formal complaint through the determination of    responsibility, including any notifications to the parties, inte    views with parties and witnesses, site visits, methods used   to gather other evidence, and hearings held;      Gender-Based Misconduct Policy and any other applicable    Caltech policy to the facts;      allegation, including a determination regarding responsibility    and any sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies    determined by the appropriate administrator; and     respondent to appeal. v.  The determinations regarding responsibility and sanctions, reme -dies, and systemic remedies become final either on the date that  the parties are provided the result of any appeal, or if an appeal  is not filed, the date on which an appeal would no longer be considered timely.  w.  The Title IX Coordinator will be informed of the outcome of the  investigation and any appeal in order to carry out their respon -sibilities to consult on and coordinate implementation of any  sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies, monitor outcomes,  identify and address areas of needed education and training  presented by the case, and assess and address effects on the  campus climate.x. Exceptions to or modification of these procedures can be made  at any time by the Title IX Coordinator, provost, deans or asso -ciate deans, associate vice president for human resources, or  director for human resources at JPL in order to ensure these  procedures promote fairness to both parties and compliance  with the law.  9. Potential Sanctions, Remedies, and Systemic RemediesIf a violation of Caltech™s Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy  has occurred, appropriate sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies,  111as appropriate, will be imposed. The appropriate administrator may  impose any one or more of the following:   Sanctions              specified period of time;      postdoctoral scholars;          interaction with students or other members of the Caltec    community;        activities;              Remedies    initial appointment, both on and off campus;       directive is issued after a finding of responsibility has been     made, it shall be unilateral and apply only against the party   found responsible      of grading or other evaluative responsibilities (in conjunction    with appropriate faculty and deans as necessary);       agreement of the appropriate faculty);      ﬁincomplete,ﬂ drop a course without penalty, or transfer    sections (with the agreement of the appropriate faculty);         refund in accordance with campus housing policies;        relocation;  Institute Policies112     Caltech facilities or activities pending resolution of the matter;        classes and activities;         individuals to reasonably achieve the goals of this policy.   Systemic Remedies    team-based communication or outreach effort and training,    as appropriate      or other Institute website, as appropriate      pertinent to preventative outreach efforts If the respondent was found not to have violated Caltech™s Sex- and  Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, but the investigation concluded that  they committed some other wrongful or improper act, appropriate cor -rective action will be taken. Effective corrective action may also require  remedies for a complainant and/or systemic remedies for the broader  Caltech community. Caltech will take appropriate measures to prevent  the reoccurrence of any prohibited conduct, and to correct and prevent  any discriminatory or retaliatory effects, as appropriate. In determining sanctions, remedies, and systemic remedies, as  appropriate, the administrator will consult with the Title IX Coordinator  and other persons they deem appropriate, to take steps to prevent  recurrence of any harassment and to correct its discriminatory effects  on the complainant and, if appropriate, others.   NOTE: The Institute may undertake remedies and systemic reme -dies, as appropriate, to safeguard a complainant™s access to education,  at any time.  The complainant™s engagement in a resolution process is  not a prerequisite for such Institute action.   10. Disclosure of OutcomesOutcomes of disciplinary proceedings may be disclosed consistent  with applicable law, including FERPA, Title IX, and the Clery Act. Upon  request, Caltech will disclose the outcomes of a disciplinary proceeding  against a student who is the alleged perpetrator of any crime of sexual violence to the alleged victim.Outcomes of the investigation process will be disclosed on a need-to- know basis, as determined by the Title IX Coordinator, in order to effect  sanctions and/or other remedies and systemic remedies.  11. AppealAppeals may be submitted by either party. They must be in writing and  submitted within ten (10) calendar days of notification of the decision to 113the appropriate administrator (the provost for faculty, the associate vice  president for human resources for postdoctoral scholars and campus  staff, the vice president of student affairs for students, or, the director  for human resources at JPL for JPL employee respondents). In assess -ing appeals, these administrators may consult with any individual they deem appropriate.  The recipient of the appeal will notify the Title IX  Coordinator and any other party in writing when an appeal is filed.  Appeals of decisions resulting from the investigation process are lim -ited to one or more of the following grounds: a procedural irregularity  that affected the outcome of the matter; new evidence (including a new  witness) that was not reasonably available at the time the determination  regarding responsibility was made and that could affect the outcome  of the matter; the Title IX Coordinator, investigator(s), decision mak -er(s), or administrator who determined and imposed any sanctions or remedies had a conflict of interest or bias for or against complainants  or respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent  that affected the outcome of the matter; the sanctions or remedies are  substantially disproportionate to the conduct for which the respondent  was found responsible.   If a party submits an appeal, the other party will have the opportu-nity to submit a written response to the appeal within ten (10) calendar  days of the filing of the appeal. The parties simultaneously will be informed, in writing, of the outcome of the appeal. The appeal decision letter will state the rationale for the result. Appeal decisions are final.  XIV. Further Complaints If the corrective action does not end the prohibited conduct, the com -plainant should immediately notify at campus the Title IX Coordinator,  or a deputy Title IX Coordinator, the provost or a division chair, dean or  associate dean, Employee and Organizational Development director; or  at JPL, the Deputy Title IX Coordinator. In such cases, the complainant  has the right to file another formal complaint based on new prohibited  conduct.Related Policies and Procedures:  Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct   Nondiscrimination and Equal Employment Opportunity Unlawful Harassment  Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination,  Harassment, and Retaliation Violence Prevention   SUBSTANCE ABUSE 1.0  Policy Caltech is committed to providing a safe, healthy, and productive  work and academic environment for all its faculty, staff, postdoctoral  scholars and students. Consistent with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of  1988 and the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act Amendments  of 1989, it is Caltech™s policy to maintain a work and academic envi -Institute Policies114ronment free from drug and alcohol abuse. Faculty, staff, postdoctoral  scholars, and students are required to comply with this policy and the  related guidelines provided by the academic divisions and student  organizations. 2.0  Scope  2.1  Prohibited Conduct   The unlawful use, manufacture, distribution, cultivation, dispensation,  possession, sale, purchase of, or offer to sell or purchase controlled  substances* or alcohol on the Caltech campus or its off-site loca -tions, including the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (ﬁJPLﬂ), or as any part  of its activities, is prohibited. Controlled substances include, but are  not limited to, marijuana, heroin, cocaine, LSD, and amphetamines.  Despite recent changes to California law, marijuana still is a controlled  substance under federal law, and therefore the use, manufacture, dis -tribution, cultivation, dispensation, possession, sale, purchase of or  offer to sell or purchase marijuana on the Caltech campus or its off-site  locations, including JPL, or as any part of its activities, continues to be prohibited. The recreational use of nitrous oxide is also prohibited  under this policy. In addition, every employee is prohibited from being under the influ -ence of controlled substances, alcohol, or any substance that may impair  the employee™s ability to perform their job duties safely or productively, or  that may otherwise impair their senses, coordination, or judgment while  on duty. Any employee reporting to work (or otherwise at work) under  the influence of, or having present in their body, any prescribed drug,  alcohol, or other substances or medication that may adversely affect the  employee™s ability to work in a safe, productive, or efficient manner, must  advise their supervisor. Caltech may require an employee to submit to  drug and alcohol testing consistent with Caltech policy and applicable  federal and state law. Testing procedures that apply to JPL employees  are available on the JPL Human Resources website. 2.2 Requirements for Employees and StudentsAs a condition of continued enrollment, every student is required to  comply with this policy. As a condition of employment, all Caltech  employees (this includes faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and  student employees), regardless of their location, are required to com -ply with this policy. A Caltech employee who violates this policy will  be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. A violation of this policy is likely to result in termination,  even for a first offense. Similarly, all students, not just student employ -ees, should understand that disciplinary action including involuntary leave or expulsion from Caltech may be invoked for violation of this  policy and that intoxication is never an excuse for misconduct. Caltech may contact a student™s parents when a student under 21  violates this policy. If a student™s behavior with respect to alcohol and  drugs presents a danger to themselves or others, Caltech may inform  the parents.  115In addition, pursuant to federal law, a student™s eligibility for feder -al financial aid may be suspended if the student is convicted, under federal or state law, of any offense involving the possession or sale of  illegal drugs.A faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholar, or student who is convicted  (including a plea of nolo contendere [no contest]) of a criminal drug  statute violation occurring in the workplace or on Caltech property  must notify Caltech in writing within five (5) calendar days after the conviction. Campus employees should inform the assistant vice pres -ident of human resources, and students should inform their dean. JPL  employees should inform the manager of employee relations.  2.3  Third Party RequirementsPersons who are not employees of Caltech but who perform work at  Caltech for its benefit (such as contractors and their employees, tem-porary employees provided by agencies, visitors engaged in joint proj -ects at Caltech, etc.), are required to comply with this policy. Violation  of this policy is likely to result in being barred from the workplace even  for a first offense. 3.0  Health RisksThe use of any mind- or mood-altering substance, including alcohol, can lead to psychological dependence, which is defined as a need or craving for the substance and feelings of restlessness, tension, or anx -iety when the substance is not used. In addition, with many substanc-es, use can lead to physical tolerance, characterized by the need for increasing amounts of the substance to achieve the same effect, and/ or physical dependence, characterized by the onset of unpleasant or painful physiological symptoms when the substance is no longer being used. As tolerance and psychological or physical dependence develop, judgment becomes impaired, and the individual often does not realize  they are losing control over the use of the substance and that they  need help.It is impossible to predict accurately how an individual will react to  a specific drug or to alcohol because effects vary depending on the  person, environmental variables, the dosage and potency of the sub -stance, the method of taking the substance, the frequency of use, and  whether the substance is taken in conjunction with other substances. Illegal drugs have particularly unpredictable effects due to variabili -ty in dosage and purity. Further, the overall potency of street drugs  has increased dramatically over the past two decades, making users  increasingly susceptible to negative effects. Alcohol acts as a depressant to the central nervous system and can  cause serious short- and long-term damage. Short-term effects include  nausea, vomiting, and ulcers; more chronic abuse can lead to brain,  liver, kidney, and heart damage, and even to eventual death. Ingesting  a large amount of alcohol at one time can lead to alcohol poisoning,  coma, and death. Drugs such as LSD, amphetamines, marijuana, and alcohol alter emotion, cognition, perception, physiology, and behavior  in a variety of ways. Health risks include but are not limited to depres -Institute Policies116sion, apathy, hallucinations, paranoia, and impaired judgment, and all  substances have an adverse effect on pregnancy and the fetus. When  two or more substances are combined, the effect is often stronger than  their additive sum. 4.0  Local, State, and Federal Legal Sanctions Local, state, and federal laws establish severe penalties for violations of  drug and alcohol statutes. These sanctions, upon conviction, may range  from a fine to life imprisonment. In the case of possession and distribu -tion of illegal drugs, these sanctions could include the seizure and sum -mary forfeiture of property, including vehicles. It is especially important to  know that federal laws have established penalties for illegally distributing  drugs to include life imprisonment and fines of up to $10,000,000.  4.1 Examples  -onment in the state prison.  -erages (including beer and wine) by any person under the age of 21 is prohibited.      California Alcoholic Beverage Control License, is prohibited.  ﬁintoxicating agentsﬂ with the intent of enabling oneself or the drugged person to commit a felony. The person who induced the  other may be regarded as a principal in any crime committed.  an intoxicating liquor or drug and unable to care for their own  safety, or who is interfering with the use of a public way, is guilty  of disorderly conduct, which is a misdemeanor.   with the intent to inhale it for purpose of altering their mood or mental functioning.5.0  Resources for Staff, Faculty, Postdoctoral Scholars and StudentsCaltech recognizes drug and alcohol abuse and dependency as treat -able conditions and offers faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and stu -dents support programs for individuals with substance use problems.  Faculty, staff, and postdoctoral scholars are encouraged to seek assis -tance for drug- and alcohol-related problems through the Caltech Staff  and Faculty Consultation Center (SFCC) at campus and the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) at JPL. Individuals can contact the SFCC  by calling (626) 395-8360, and the EAP by calling (800) 367-7474. Students are encouraged to seek assistance from the Student Wellness  Services (SWS) at (626) 395-8331. In addition, faculty, staff, postdoc -toral scholars, and students can seek confidential referral information  through the Center for Inclusion & Diversity at (626) 395-3221. 117The staff of the SFCC, the EAP, and the SWS will help employees  and students to identify appropriate treatment resources and will refer  them to counseling, treatment, or rehabilitation programs, as appropri -ate. Health insurance plans provide varying amounts of coverage for  substance-abuse programs to address substance abuse and rehabil -itation. Individuals may contact their health providers or the Caltech  Human Resources Benefits office at campus at (626) 395-6443, or JPL  at (818) 354-4447, for plan details. Information obtained regarding a  faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholar, or student during voluntary partici -pation in services at the SFCC, EAP, SWS, or any related program will  be treated as strictly confidential, and no information, including whether  or not an individual is receiving services, will be shared with third par -ties, except by written consent or as required by law. 6.0  Drug and Alcohol Awareness Program  Caltech has established and will maintain a drug and alcohol aware -ness program to educate faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and stu -dents about:1. Caltech™s substance abuse policy; 2. the dangers of drugs and alcohol in a work and academic envi-ronment; faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholar, and student assis -tance programs; and 3. disciplinary action that may be imposed on faculty, staff, post -doctoral scholars, and students for violations of this policy. Caltech will distribute to all faculty, staff, postdoctoral scholars, and  students a copy of this policy on an annual basis.7.0  Supervisor™s Responsibilities If an employee is suspected of violating this policy, the employee™s  supervisor should consult with the director of employee and orga -nizational development (EOD) at campus or the Employee Relations Department of the Human Resources Directorate at JPL regarding  appropriate actions, which may include an investigation and discipline  up to and including termination of employment. If a supervisor believes an employee™s behavior raises safety concerns for the employee or  others, the supervisor must take immediate action, including calling EOD on campus or the Employee Relations Department of the Human Resources Directorate at JPL, to assess and address the situation and  to remove the employee from the worksite if necessary. 8.0  Caltech Sanctions Caltech will impose sanctions for violations of or failure to comply with  the requirements of this policy. These sanctions will be consistently  enforced, and penalties will depend on the severity of the offenses.  Penalties may include employment termination and student expulsion from Caltech, and referral to law enforcement for the most serious vio -lations of the law and this policy (e.g., the manufacture or distribution  of banned substances). Disciplinary action may be invoked entirely  Institute Policies118apart from any civil or criminal penalties that the faculty, staff, postdoc -toral scholars, and students might incur. UNLAWFUL HARASSMENT   1.0  Policy It is the policy of Caltech to provide a work and academic environment  free of unlawful harassment (ﬁharassmentﬂ). Harassment is a form of  misconduct that includes unwelcome physical, verbal or nonverbal conduct that results in a person feeling intimidated, threatened, humili -ated, or demeaned, and is likely to interfere with an individual™s work or  education, or adversely affects an individual™s living conditions.  Harassment in any form, based on any of the following protected char -acteristics and protected activities (ﬁprotected characteristicsﬂ), is unlawful  and is strictly prohibited at all times, as are all forms of prohibited conduct  set forth in the Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct Policy, including sexu -al and gender-based harassment and sexual misconduct:            or related medical conditions)        history of cancer)   driver™s license issued to persons unable to prove that their pres -ence in the United States is authorized under federal law)   genetic characteristics)                -tected characteristics Harassment in the employment environment may include, but is not  limited to, these examples:  offensive, or hostile working environment, or that interferes with  119work performance, including conduct that   denigrates or shows hostility or aversion toward an individual  because of any protected characteristic    name calling, or teasing  -ed posters, photographs, symbols, cartoons, drawings, computer  displays, e-mails, text messages, objects, or digital and social  media activity, including blogs, forums, chat rooms, social net -working sites, and other social media applications  blocking someone™s path or normal movement, gestures, and leer -ing  downs    of continued employment or to avoid loss of employment benefits     gender, sexual orientation, gender nonconformity, and/or gender  identity  one gender, race, or another protected characteristic Harassment in the educational setting also includes harassment based on protected characteristics that is contrary to the pursuit of  inquiry and education. The following are examples of behaviors that  may constitute harassment in the educational setting: because the adviser says that other minority students have had difficulty in the course   of lack of mobility -dent worker while assigning more complex tasks to a Caucasian  student worker who is at the same educational level.    -sion with other students   national origin Complaints concerning sex and gender-based discrimination and  harassment and sexual misconduct are governed by the Sex- and  Gender-Based Misconduct Policy.  Caltech is committed to educating the community in ways to prevent  harassment. Caltech requires all employees, including those respon -sible for directing or supervising other Caltech employees or evaluat -ing the work of students, to regularly participate in training regarding  harassment, and the prevention of harassment and other abusive con -duct, consistent with federal and state legal requirements.  Institute Policies1202.0  Scope This policy applies to all members of the Caltech community, including  at JPL (students, faculty, supervisory and nonsupervisory employees,  postdoctoral scholars, volunteers, interns, vendors, contractors, per -sons performing services under contract with Caltech, visitors, and any other individuals regularly or temporarily employed, studying, living,  visiting, or otherwise participating in Caltech™s employment and educa -tion programs and activities). This policy applies to conduct occurring  on Institute-controlled property, at Institute-sponsored events and in  Institute employment and education programs and activities regardless  of location.3.0  Reporting Complaints and Concerns Caltech™s ability to remedy harassment and maintain a harassment-free  environment is limited if incidents are not reported. Anyone who wit -nesses, experiences, or is otherwise aware of conduct that they believe  to be in violation of this policy, including retaliation, is urged to imme -diately report it, or to request any assistance and guidance, from the  Equity and Title IX Office or one of the Equal Employment Opportunity  coordinators listed below, at campus, or the Employee Relations Group  at JPL. Reports may be made at any time. A delay should not discour-age anyone from reporting harassment. Delayed reporting is better than  no reporting. Reports may be made in writing or orally. Members of the Caltech community are encouraged to err on the  side of reporting any conduct they think may be harassment covered  under this policy, regardless of where the incident occurred or who  committed it. Even if Caltech does not have jurisdiction over the inci-dent or the perpetrator, Caltech will take reasonable action to remedy  the effects of the harassment on the Caltech community and prevent  any reoccurrence of the behavior.  Any employee in a supervisory role, including faculty, must promptly  report all alleged harassment, discrimination, gender-based miscon -duct, and retaliation, regardless of its alleged severity or frequency, to  the Equity and Title IX Office at campus or Human Resources at JPL,  which will provide guidance and advice. In addition, other employees  qualifying as responsible employees under the Sex- and Gender-Based  Misconduct Policy, Section II, 6.2, must promptly report any instance  of prohibited conduct, as defined in Section III, 13.0, to the Equity and  Title IX Office or the Deputy Title IX coordinator for JPL, as appropriate.  If a member of the Caltech community would like support and guidance in filing a complaint, they may contact one of the Equal Employment Opportunity coordinators, the assistant vice president for  equity and equity investigations in the Equity and Title IX Office, JPL™s  manager of employee relations, or the JPL section manager of talent  management or Human Resources Business Partners at JPL.  1214.0  Anonymous ReportingCaltech provides the following resources for anonymous reporting:  Campus Hotline     (626) 395-8787 or      (888) 395-8787 JPL Ethics Hotline   (818) 354-9999 JPL Protective Services Division™s Workplace Violence Hotline     (818) 393-2851For either Campus or JPL by submitting a compliance HotlineContact FormIf the reporting party wants to remain anonymous, they should not  share any personally identifying information. If the reporting party does  share such information, the Equity and Title IX Office will contact the  reporting party with information about support resources and reporting  options. If an investigation is pursued, the reporting party who identi -fied themselves will be notified. 5.0  Contacting Outside AgenciesIn addition, employees who believe they have been unlawfully harassed on the basis of a protected characteristic have the right to file a com -plaint with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing, which  have the authority to remedy violations. Employees, students, and  others participating in Caltech™s educational programs and activities  may file complaints with the U.S. Department of Education Office for  Civil Rights (415) 486-5555, ocr.sanfrancisco@ed.gov or (800) 421-3481  or OCR@ed.gov. Complaints may also be directed to the Bureau for  Private Postsecondary Education at https://bppe.ca.gov/.6.0  Investigation of ComplaintsCaltech will conduct an appropriate, timely, and thorough investiga -tion into complaints within the scope of this policy to determine what occurred and take reasonable steps to remedy the effects of any  harassment and prevent recurrence of the behavior. Caltech provides  all parties with appropriate due process and reaches appropriate con -clusions based on the evidence collected. Caltech takes appropriate  action, including disciplinary measures, when warranted.  7.0  Prohibition against Retaliation No one may intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any  individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by this policy or the related procedures, or because the indi -vidual has made a report or complaint, testified, assisted, participated,  or refused to participate in any manner in any action or process under  this policy or the related procedures. Intimidation, threats, coercion, or  discrimination, for the purpose of interfering with any right under this policy or the related procedures constitutes retaliation. The rights and  privileges secured under this policy and the related procedures include  Institute Policies122but are not limited to: (i) filing or assisting in the filing of a complaint  or report of a suspected violation of this policy; (ii) opposing any act  or practice made unlawful by any federal, state, or local laws requiring  equal opportunity; (iii) participating, assisting, or otherwise cooperating in an investigation, compliance review, hearing, or any other activity  related to a violation of this policy or administration of any federal,  state, or local law requiring equal opportunity; and/or (iv) exercising  any legal right protected by federal, state or local law requiring equal  opportunity. Complaints of retaliation will be addressed under the  Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment,  and Retaliation. The following actions do not constitute retaliation: the exercise of  rights protected under applicable law or Caltech™s charging an indi -vidual with a policy violation for making a materially false statement in bad faith in the course of a resolution process. A determination that a  respondent was responsible for alleged misconduct alone is not suffi -cient to conclude that any party made a materially false statement in bad faith.8.0  PrivacyA member of the Caltech community who wishes to report unlawful  discrimination, harassment, or retaliation should do so as soon as pos -sible, although reports (hereinafter ﬁcomplaintsﬂ) may be made at any  time. Complaints can be made orally or in writing. Complaints should be brought to the attention of one of the individuals designated in this  Policy.   Privacy generally means that information related to a report of  harassment will only be shared with those individuals who have a  ﬁneed to know.ﬂ The determination of who has a ﬁneed to knowﬂ is  within the discretion of Caltech. These individuals are required to be  discreet and respect the privacy of all individuals involved. No meetings or conversations that take place under this policy or the Procedures for Complaints of Unlawful Discrimination, Harassment,  and Retaliation may be audio- or audio-visually recorded by anyone.  9.0  Confidential Resources Caltech offers members of the Caltech community the choice of seek -ing confidential counseling outside of Caltech™s procedural mechanisms  for resolving unlawful harassment complaints. These confidential coun -seling services are intended for the personal benefit of the individual  and offer a setting where various courses of action can be explored.  Members of the Caltech community may access the offices below for  confidential support. Counselors and designated confidential advocates in these offices will listen and help identify options and next steps.  Talking to any of these staff members does not constitute reporting an  incident to Caltech.Confidentiality generally means that information shared by an indi -vidual with designated campus or community professionals cannot be  revealed to any other individual without the express permission of the  individual. These professionals are listed below. They are prohibited  123from breaking confidentiality unless there is an imminent threat of harm  to self or others or as otherwise required or permitted by law. When a  report involves suspected abuse of a minor under the age of 18, these  confidential resources may be required by state law to notify child pro -tective services and/or local law enforcement. An individual who has experienced unlawful harassment and who first requests confidentiality may later decide to file a complaint  with Caltech. The mental health professionals and other confidential  resources listed below will provide the individual with assistance in fil -ing a complaint if the individual wishes to do so.Mental health professionals in the Student Wellness Services™  Counseling Services and the Staff and Faculty Consultation Center pro -vide mental health counseling services to the campus community. The  JPL Employee Assistance Program provides mental health counseling  services to the JPL community. They will not report any information  about an incident to Caltech, including the Title IX coordinator, unless  requested by their client. They can be contacted 24 hours a day/7 days  a week at:  (626) 395-8331 Student Wellness, Counseling Services  (626) 395-5000 after hours Counseling Services may be     contacted via Security        (626) 395-8360      Staff & Faculty Consultation Center  (626) 395-5000 after hours via Security  (800) 367-7474 Empathia identify yourself as a JPL      employee https://www.mylifematters.        com/  (Password: JPL) Other Confidential resources are:   & Diversity (students):    (626) 395-3221       or (626) 395-8108              (888) 395-8787      10.0  Equal Employment Opportunity Coordinators and Title IX  Coordinator Caltech has designated Equal Opportunity coordinators who are  responsible for assisting with and coordinating the education and com -pliance efforts relating to equal opportunity and nondiscrimination laws  and Caltech policies. The following individuals have been designated as Equal Employment Opportunity coordinators (EEO coordinators): the  provost is the coordinator for faculty, the assistant vice president for  Institute Policies124human resources is the coordinator for campus staff and volunteers,  the associate deans of students are the coordinators for undergraduate  students and interns, the dean of graduate studies is the coordinator  for graduate students and interns, and the director for human resourc -es at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory is the coordinator for employees,  interns and volunteers assigned there.  The assistant vice president for equity and equity investigations, who  manages the Equity and Title IX Office, also has been designated as  Caltech™s Title IX coordinator. The contact number is (626) 395-3132,  email: equity@caltech.edu, or visit the office in Room 205, Center for  Student Services.11.0  Informational Resources Information on unlawful harassment, as well as copies of Caltech™s  Nondiscrimination and  Equal Employment Opportunity, Unlawful  Harassment, Sex- and Gender-Based Misconduct, and Violence  Prevention policies, are available from Caltech™s Title IX coordinator  and deputy coordinators, Human Resources, Student Affairs and  Deans offices, the Caltech Center for Inclusion & Diversity, resident  associates, the Staff and Faculty Consultation Center, and Employee &  Organizational Development at campus, and Employee Relations and  the Human Resources Business Partners at JPL. The policies are pub -lished in the Caltech Catalog and on the following Caltech websites: Caltech Human Resources, JPL Human Resources, Equity and Title IX  Office, and Student Affairs. Related Policies and Procedures:   Harassment, and Retaliation     VIOLENCE PREVENTION 1.0  Policy It is the policy of Caltech to provide a safe and secure environment  for all members of the Caltech community and to prohibit all forms of  violence on its premises or in any of its programs or activities. Caltech  promotes measures aimed at reducing incidents of violence and the  management of situations that may lead to violence. All members of the Caltech community shall cooperate to maintain a safe environment  and shall comply with this policy. 2.0  Scope 2.1  Prohibited ConductCaltech does not tolerate violence, threats of violence, child abuse,  125child neglect, or stalking on any Institute premises or in any Institute  activity or program. All weapons are banned from Institute premises  and at Institute activities and programs as set forth below.  2.2  Reporting Violence Any individual who experiences or observes a threat or act of violence,  or a weapon on Institute premises or at an Institute activity or program  must immediately notify Campus Security or JPL Protective Services  Division, or law enforcement. An individual at a non-campus or non- JPL location must immediately notify local law enforcement. Campus Security      (626) 395-5000 JPL Protective Services Division    (818) 354-3530     If an individual becomes aware of behavior that they find  concerning, the individual should notify one of the following  individuals or offices: Employee™s supervisor/management Campus Human Resources Š EOD    (626) 395-8039Dean of Students     (626) 395-6351Dean of Graduate Studies    (626) 395-6346Provost Office      (626) 395-6320 Assistant Vice President for Equity and   Equity Investigations, Title IX Coordinator  (626) 395-3130    Campus Security      (626) 395-5000 Caltech Hotline (anonymous)   (626) 395-8787 or          (888) 395-8787 JPL Human Resources      (818) 354-4447JPL Protective Services Division    (818) 354-3530JPL Workplace Violence Hotline    (818) 393-2851JPL Ethics Office      (818) 354-6338JPL Ethics Help Line (anonymous)   (818) 354-9999 or          (866) 405-7536 Caltech will handle all reports of violence in a confidential manner,  with information released as determined to be appropriate by Caltech.  Managers are required to immediately report any violation or suspect -ed violation of this policy to Caltech Security, JPL Protective Services  Division, Human Resources, the deans or the provost, whether the  violation is observed on Institute premises or at any Institute activity or  program. Caltech policy prohibits retaliation against any faculty, staff,  postdoctoral scholar, student, or third party who, in good faith, reports  a violation or suspected violation of this policy. Caltech will not tolerate intentional false reporting of incidents. A  good faith complaint that results in a finding of ﬁno violationﬂ is not  considered a false report. However, when a complainant or third party  is found to have fabricated allegations or to have given false informa-tion with malicious intent or in bad faith, they may be subject to disci-plinary action.Institute Policies1262.3  Reporting Child Abuse or Child NeglectEvery member of the Caltech community who knows of or reasonably  suspects child abuse or child neglect has a personal responsibility  to report to Caltech Security or the JPL Protective Services Division  immediately.  Certain members of the communityŠknown as mandated report -ersŠhave a legal responsibility to act. A mandated reporter is a  Caltech employee who meets one of the following definitions: (a) holds a job recognized by the State of California as one that is legally  required to report child abuse or neglect no matter where it occurs;  or (b) engages in duties that bring them into contact with children on  a regular basis or who supervises those whose duties bring them into  contact with children on a regular basis, and thus are required to report  child abuse or neglect occurring on Caltech premises or at an official  activity of, or program conducted by, Caltech. All athletic coaches,  including assistant coaches and graduate assistants involved in coach-ing, are mandated reporters under part (a) of the definition above and  must report child abuse or neglect no matter where it occurs. Certain  other professionals at Caltech, such as medical and mental health pro -fessionals, are also mandated reporters under part (a). Mandated reporters must report child abuse and neglect whenever,  in their professional capacity or within the scope of their employment,  they observe or reasonably suspect it. A mandated reporter should rea -sonably suspect child abuse or neglect whenever ﬁit is objectively rea -sonable – to entertain such a suspicion, based upon facts that could cause a reasonable person in a like position, drawing, when appropri -ate, on his or her training and experience, to suspect child abuse or neglect.ﬂ (Penal Code § 11166(a)).Mandated reporters have the additional responsibility to report  immediately or as soon as practicably possible by telephone and to submit a written follow-up report within 36 hours of receiving infor -mation concerning the incident to the LA County Child Protection  Hotline (800) 540-4000 (or from out of state (213) 639-4500) or to the  Pasadena Police Department 911 (for emergencies) or (626) 744-4501  (for non-emergencies), or to another local police department.  A Suspected Child Abuse Report (SCAR) can be completed online (where the initial report was made to the LA County Child Protection  Hotline) at https://mandreptla.org. Mandated reporters will be provided  the opportunity for training by Caltech and must sign an ﬁEmployee Acknowledgement of mandated reporter status.ﬂ 2.4  Definitions Acts of violence include any physical action, whether intentional or reck -less, that harms or threatens the safety of another individual at Caltech. A threat of violence includes any behavior that by its very nature  could be interpreted by a reasonable person as intent to cause physical  harm to another individual.Child means a person under the age of 18 years.Child abuse includes physical injury inflicted on a child by another person, serious endangerment of a child™s physical or mental health  127due to injury by act or omission, sexual exploitation of a child (including sexual intercourse between a child under 16 years of age and a person  21 years of age or older), lewd or lascivious acts, and child molestation; and unlawful corporal punishment. Child neglect includes negligent treatment or maltreatment of a child  under circumstances indicating harm or threatened harm to the child™s  health or welfare.  Stalking is a course of conduct directed at an individual that would  cause a reasonable person to fear for his or safety or the safety of  others, or suffer substantial emotional distress. Course of conduct  means two or more acts, including, but not limited to, acts in which the  stalker directly, indirectly, or through third parties, by any action, meth -od, device, or means, follows, monitors, observes, surveils, threatens,  or communicates to or about a person or interferes with the person™s  property. Reasonable person means a reasonable person under similar  circumstances and with similar identities to the victim. Stalking that is  sex or gender-based should be reported and will be handled pursuant  to the Sex-and Gender-Based Misconduct policy and applicable pro -cedures. Stalking that is not sex or gender-based is covered by this  policy. Weapon is defined as a firearm, ammunition, BB or pellet gun, paint -ball gun, stun gun, compressed air gun, or any replica firearm, martial  arts weapon, fireworks, explosives, dangerous or highly flammable  chemicals, dirk, dagger, ice pick, or knife having a blade longer than 2  1/2 inches (except for a knife or ice pick used for food preparation or  consumption or for a lawful use in or around a residence), razor with an  unguarded blade, razor blade, or box cutter (except for a razor, razor  blade or box cutter for lawful use in a residence), or any object when  used in a manner or under a circumstance that potentially may or does  result in an act of violence or threat of violence.  An object otherwise defined above as a weapon is excepted when used for a lawful purpose within the scope of the person™s employment  or academic activities when approved by Caltech.  2.5 Investigating Prohibited ConductReports of conduct that may violate any aspect of this policy will be taken seriously, properly investigated, and dealt with accordingly.  Individuals who are found to have violated this policy may be subject  to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment, expulsion, or permanent removal from the premises. Additionally, when  such acts potentially violate state or federal laws, the matter may be referred to law enforcement agencies for investigation.  3.0  Resources The Staff and Faculty Consultation Center and the Student Counseling  Center at campus or Empathia/Life Matters at JPL may provide  resources such as intervention, consultation, or referral for clinical  evaluation or treatment, including arranging for counselors to work with  at-risk individuals and victims and observers of an incident. In addition, training is available from Human Resources regarding violence preven -Institute Policies128tion, public safety awareness, and child abuse. Contact information for  these and other resources are: Campus Staff and Faculty Consultation  Center      (626) 395-8360 Human Resources-EOD     (626) 395-8039JPLHuman Resources     (818) 354-4447Empathia/Life Matters    (800) 367-7474Related Policies  Harassment and Retaliation    Misconduct under Title IX    WHISTLEBLOWER POLICY 1.0  Policy It is important to Caltech that employees disclose violations or potential violations of law or other serious breaches of conduct without the fear  of retaliation. Caltech policy prohibits retaliation against an individual  who makes a good faith disclosure of suspected wrongful conduct.  Any individual who engages in retaliation in violation of this policy will  be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment or permanent separation from Caltech. It is Caltech™s policy to comply with applicable laws and regulations,  including California™s whistleblower law protections provided under  Labor Code Section 1102.5 and the whistleblower rights and reme -dies provided under 41 USC Section 4712, which are summarized at  Enhancement of Employee Whistleblower Protection. As employees of  Caltech, each individual is responsible for making sure their conduct  fully complies with all laws and regulations as well as Institute policies.  Caltech expects employees with knowledge of specific acts that they reasonably believe violate the law or Caltech policy to disclose those  acts to an appropriate Caltech official. 2.0  Reporting An employee who becomes aware of any inappropriate or improper  activity, or who believes they have been the subject of retaliation for  making a good faith disclosure, is encouraged to contact their super -visor or one of the following offices: Human Resources, JPL Ethics  Office, Audit Services and Institute Compliance (ASIC), or the Office  of General Counsel. Anyone with questions or concerns regarding  129inappropriate or improper activities within Caltech may use one of the  anonymous reporting mechanisms outlined below. Web Hotline: http://hotline.caltech.edu/Telephone Hotline:  (626) 395-8787 or toll free (888) 395-8787 Interoffice Mail: Audit Services and Institute Compliance, MC 250-64U.S. Mail:Audit Services and Institute Compliance1200 E. California Blvd, MC 250-64, Pasadena, CA 91125 JPL Ethics Line:(818) 354-9999 or toll free (866) 405-7536    STUDENT AFFAIRS POLICIES In addition to the Institute Policies listed above, there are a number  of Student Affairs policies, procedures and guidelines on the Student  Affairs website:  Alcohol and Other Drugs Fire Safety Good SamaritanHazing Prevention Missing StudentMural Policy in Caltech HousingPersonal Privacy and Intellectual Property Student Health and HygieneStudent Problem-Resolution Process Student Vaccination and Arrival Policies and Processes Vaccination For the text of the full policies, please see the Student Affairs web -site at studentaffairs.caltech.edu/policies.  Student Affairs Policies 130Section Two Areas of Study  and ResearchAreas of Study and Research 131AEROSPACE  The Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, the Kármán Laboratory of  Fluid Mechanics and Jet Propulsion, and the Firestone Flight Sciences  Laboratory form the Graduate Aerospace Laboratories, widely known  as GALCIT. In this complex are housed the solid mechanics, impact  mechanics, and deployable space structures laboratories, the hyper -sonics and hydrodynamics facilities, the explosion dynamics and deto -nation physics laboratories, and the Joe and Edwina Charyk Laboratory of Bioinspired Design and Biopropulsion, the Center for Autonomous  Systems and Technologies, as well as the various disciplines making  up the broad field known as aerospace. Areas of Research Aerospace has evolved at Caltech from a field of basic research and  engineering, primarily related to the development of the airplane, into  a wide discipline encompassing a broad spectrum of basic as well  as applied problems in fluid dynamics and mechanics of solids and  materials and design and control of autonomous systems. Educational  and research thrusts include the application of mechanics to various  aspects of space exploration and to the study of biosystems and bio-propulsion. Research at GALCIT has traditionally pioneered exploration  of areas that have anticipated subsequent technological demands.  This tradition places a high premium on in-depth understanding of  fields both closely and remotely related to the behavior of fluids, solids,  combustion, materials, and structures, such as physics, applied and  computational mathematics, dynamical systems, earthquake physics, atmospheric studies, materials science, micro- and optoelectronics,  microfluidics, bioinspired design, biomedical devices, and even astro -physics. GALCIT students are known and sought after for their broad  yet intense education and for their ability to deal with new and chal-lenging problems. Major areas of experimental, theoretical, and numerical research cur -rently pursued by aerospace students at Caltech are briefly described  below. Ł Mechanics of Lightweight Space Structures. Current efforts in  the field of next-generation deployable space structures aim to  increase reliability and also lower fabrication and assembly costs  by moving toward structures that consist of only a small number  of separate pieces able to undergo large elastic deformations.  These elasticŒstored-energy structures return to their original,  unstressed configuration when they are released in orbit. The  design of these structures requires accurate structural models  that incorporate geometry change and contact effects in suf -ficient detail to capture the actual behavior that is observed in  ground tests. Local and global instabilities are often observed  during folding/deployment, and their effects can also be very  important. Ultimately, validation against space-based experi -ments will be pursued for a selected number of structural con-figurations. In parallel to these studies, thermomechanical con-Aerospace  132stitutive models for ultrathin composite materials for these novel deployable space structures are being developed. Extensive  studies of the deployment, elastic, and viscoelastic stability of stratospheric balloons are also being conducted. Ł Physics of Fluids. Fluid dynamics as a discipline is as much a part of physics as of engineering. Physics of fluids refers to  research in areas closer to applied physics than to direct techni -cal applications. Present active research includes studies in gas  dynamics and hypervelocity flows, diffraction and focusing of  shock waves, detonation waves, shock-induced Rayleigh-Taylor  and Richtmeyer-Meshkov instabilities, transient supersonic jets,  the development of laser-scattering diagnostic techniques for  fluid-flow measurements, the study of structures and mechanics  in transition and turbulence, studies of two-phase flows and turbulent mixing, chemically reacting flows, and experimental  manipulation and control of wall-bounded flows for improved  flow characteristics, such as reduction of drag, noise, and struc -tural loading.Ł Physics of Solids and Mechanics of Materials. Mechanics of materials research involves both the quasi-static and dynamic  characterization of the mechanical behavior and failure of solids.  In order to understand materials for applications in a wide range  of structures germane to aerospace as well as other engineering  disciplines, both the physical foundations of that behavior and the mathematical or numerical representation of such behavior  needs to be understood. Accordingly, studies involve material  response at both the macroscopic (continuum) scales and the  micro- and nanoscales. Of interest are the typical engineering  metals, multiphase (composite) materials, polymers and ceram-ics, thin film materials used in microelectronic and optoelectron -ic applications, soft tissue mechanics of materials, and active materials used in structural actuation and controls. Other areas  of active research include the study of highly nonlinear dynamics  in solids, multiscale acoustic metamaterials, the analysis and design of mechanical metamaterials for the extreme conditions  in air and space applications, and nondestructive evaluation/structural health monitoring of structures. Ł Space Technology.  The goal of industrial utilization and explo-ration of space requires that one addresses a wide range of  engineering problems. Examples of research activities include  lightweight structures for large aperture systems, in-space man -ufacturing, material and structural behavior in extreme tempera -ture and radiation environments, spacecraft shielding against  hypervelocity impact threats, the mechanics of sample contain -ment for planetary protection, low-g biomechanics, biomimetics  of locomotion in planetary atmospheres, hypersonic reentry into  planetary atmospheres, in-space propulsion, guidance, naviga -tion and control, and launch-vehicle performance and safety.  Opportunities exist for research in collaboration with the Jet  Propulsion Laboratory.  Areas of Study and Research 133Ł Computational Solid Mechanics. Computational solid  mechanics addresses phenomena ranging from the atomistic  scale, e.g., nanostructured materials or nanoscale structures  and devices, to the structural scale, e.g., fracture of aircraft or  spacecraft components, modeling of large space structures  or even dynamic fragmentation phenomena accompanying  hypervelocity impact. It provides an indispensable tool for  understanding the relation between structure and mechanical  properties of materials, for predicting the efficiency of such  industrial processes as machining and metal forming, and for  assessing the safety of such structures as airplanes, space -craft, automobiles, and bridges. The goals and objectives of  this activity are to provide a state-of-the-art environment for  the development of numerical methods in solid mechanics, to  provide the computational resources required for large-scale  simulations in solid mechanics, and to serve as an instructional  facility for advanced courses.Ł Computational and Theoretical Fluid Dynamics. Many of the fluid dynamics phenomena studied experimentally at GALCIT are also being investigated by numerical simulation and by the -oretical analysis. Present active research areas in computational  and theoretical techniques include direct numerical simulation,  particle methods for flow simulation, new algorithms and sub-grid-scale models for compressible and incompressible flows,  large-eddy simulation methods, flows with shocks and driven by  shocks, analytical and computational techniques for turbulence structure diagnostics, analysis of turbulent mixing dynamics,  high-explosive interactions with deformable boundaries, chem-ically reacting flows, and detailed chemical reaction kinetics in  flames and detonations.Ł Mechanics of Fracture. An active effort is being made to  understand mechanisms in a wide range of fracture problems.  Aspects that are studied include quasi-static and dynamic crack  growth phenomena in brittle and plastically deforming solids,  polymers and advanced composites, as well as fatigue and failure of adhesive bonds. Research areas adjunct to dynamic  fracture studies are those of dynamic localization in metals and  of failure in frictional interfaces. These include the study of shear  rupture phenomena in both coherent and incoherent interfaces.  The dynamic failure of modern composite and layered materials  and the phenomenon of earthquake rupture growth along geo -logical faults have motivated these studies.Ł Aeronautical Engineering and Propulsion. Research in the  aeronautical engineering area includes studies of airplane trailing  vortices and separated flows at high angles of attack. Research  work in the propulsion area has centered on the fluid dynamic  problems associated with combustion, solid propellant rocket  motor instabilities, fluid dynamics and optimization of scramjets, and pulse detonation engines. Ł Biomechanics of Fluids and Solids. The kinematics and dynamics of fluid flows in biological systems are studied in  Aerospace  134experiments, numerical simulations, and theoretical analyses.  These flows are often characterized by unsteady vortex dynam -ics, coupled fluid interactions with flexible material surfaces, non-Newtonian fluid behavior, and, in some cases, compressibil -ity. Areas of active research include animal swimming and flying,  cardiovascular fluid dynamics and hemodynamics, the mechan -ics of morphing/active deformable surfaces for flow control, and  biologically inspired design of engineering systems. Ł Technical Fluid Mechanics.  These areas are related to a variety of  modern technological problems and, in addition, to the traditional  aeronautical problems of drag, wing stall, and shear flow mixing.  Additional areas of activity include bluff-body aerodynamics, flu -id-structure interaction, turbulent combustion, laminar diffusion  flames and their instabilities, explosions, hydrodynamics and two- phase flows, interaction of vorticity with free-surface, cardiac flows,  swimming and flying, and active and passive control of transition  and turbulence. Acoustics problems studied include jet noise, com -bustion noise, and instabilities such as the generation of organ pipe  oscillations in large burners of electric generating plants. Ł Fluid Mechanics, Control, and Materials. The effects of  boundary conditions on turbulence characteristics and general flow physics, scaling and controllability are investigated using  interdisciplinary methods based on developments in materials  science and control techniques. Experimental manipulation of  canonical and simple model flows is used to probe fundamental  issues of flow physics and control. Ł Autonomous Systems and Technologies.  Interdisciplinary  research in the expanding area of autonomous systems involves,  but are not limited to, drones, robots, and spacecraft for use in  science, exploration, and transportation. The research addresses  sensing, control, vision, machine learning, and other emerging  areas. Advanced drone research, autonomous exploration, and  swarm robotics will draw research from the full range of engi -neering at Caltech, the geological and planetary sciences divi-sion, and JPL.Physical FacilitiesThe Graduate Aerospace Laboratories contain a diversity of experi -mental facilities in support of the programs described above. The Cann  Laboratory is a teaching facility utilized for graduate and undergraduate  experiments in fluid and solid mechanics. Low-speed wind tunnels include the John W. Lucas Adaptive Wall Tunnel, the Merrill Wind  Tunnel, and special-purpose flow facilities. Smaller water channels and  a tow tank for studies of wave motion and flow visualization are also  available. For investigations of high-speed flows, there is a Ludwieg  tube, a supersonic shear layer facility, a hypervelocity expansion tube,  and the T5 shock tunnel for studying hypervelocity gas flows up to 7 km/s. Shock tubes and other special facilities are available for the  study of extreme temperatures, shock waves, deflagrations, detona -tions acoustics, and combustion at variable pressure conditions. Areas of Study and Research 135The Center for Autonomous Systems and Technologies (CAST) con -tains an 85-foot track for walking robots and a wholly enclosed 75,000  cubic foot aerodrome for drone testing which is the tallest of its kind.  Environmental simulation is provided by a 100-square-foot wall com -prised of 1,296 fans capable of generating wind speeds of up to 44 mph, along with a side wall of an additional 324 fans, all of which can be individually controlled to create a nearly infinite variety of conditions. The solid and structural mechanics laboratories contain standard as  well as special testing facilities for research related to aircraft, deploy -able space structures, and failure/fracture behavior of materials under  static and dynamic loads, including three servo-hydraulic facilities, two  of which operate on a ﬁtension/torsion™™ mode, and a nanoindenter. A  range of digital and film high-speed cameras offering recording at rates  up to 100 million frames per second are available for the study of fast  phenomena, such as wave propagation, hypervelocity impact, and the  mechanics of static and dynamic fracture. Dynamic testing facilities  include specialized electromagnetic loading devices (stored energy  ~120 kJ), a drop weight tower, split Hopkinson bars (axial/torsional),  and plate impact apparatus. Diagnostic devices include full-field inter-ferometric and high-speed temperature measurements, both for static  and dynamic applications. Other specialized facilities include a Class One clean room area that houses microelectronic wafer inspection  metrology tools, and the Small Particle Hypervelocity Impact Range  (SPHIR) jointly operated with JPL, which is capable of launching micro -meteoroid surrogate particles at speeds up to 8 km/s. Facilities are  available for scanning microscopy (AFM, STM) and electromechanical  characterization of materials.Other assets include state-of-the-art electronic instrumentation and  computer systems for real-time control of experiments, data acquisi -tion, processing, storage, and digital image processing. Computational  facilities include powerful workstations, on-campus high-performance computing machines, and remote supercomputers such as those gen -erally available at NSF, NASA, and DOE centers. Graphics workstations  are available to support research in computational fluid dynamics and  solid mechanics.APPLIED AND COMPUTATIONAL  MATHEMATICS An interdisciplinary program of study in applied and computation-al mathematics that leads to the Ph.D. degree is offered by the Computing & Mathematical Sciences department. In addition to  various basic and advanced courses taught by the applied and  computational mathematics faculty, broad selections are available  in mathematics, physics, engineering, and other areas. Students  are expected to become proficient in some special physical or  nonmathematical field. A subject minor in applied computation is  offered jointly with the computer science option.In addition to the applied and computational mathematics faculty,  professors from other disciplines such as mathematics, physics, engi -Applied and Computational Mathematics136neering, and biology supervise research and offer courses of special  interest. The applied and computational mathematics group has access  to supercomputers and concurrent computers.  The present graduate program is one leading mainly to the Ph.D.  degree. The curriculum consists of two types of courses: those that  survey the methods used in applied and computational mathematics,  and those that have a special applied and computational mathemat-ics flavor and represent active research interests of the members of  the faculty. Among the latter have been wave motion, perturbation  theory, fluid mechanics, optimization, stochastic processes, wavelet  analysis, signal processing, numerical analysis, computational elec -tromagnetism, computational fluid dynamics, mathematics of data  science, probability, random matrix theory, applied algebraic geome -try and statistical inference,  game and decision theoretic approaches  to numerical approximation and learning, homogenization, multifidelity  and multiscale analysis, and stochastic modeling, stochastic analysis, data assimilation, and inverse problems. Through study outside of  applied and computational mathematics, each student is expected  to become competent in some special physical or nonmathematical  field. In this way, subjects for research appear naturally, and a broad  educational program is provided. The group primarily interested in applied and computational math -ematics currently consists of approximately 25 students and eight  professors. Also, each year many distinguished visitors come either to  present lectures or remain in residence for large parts of the academic  year. Areas of Research Research is particularly strong in theoretical and computational fluid  mechanics, theoretical and computational materials science, compu -tational electromagnetism, numerical analysis, ordinary and partial dif -ferential equations, multi-scale analysis, geometric integration, integral  equations, linear and nonlinear wave propagation, water waves, bifur -cation theory, perturbation and asymptotic methods, stability theory,  variational methods, approximation theory, uncertainty quantification,  randomized algorithms, continuous optimization, discrete optimization,  statistical estimation, computational harmonic analysis, stochastic pro -cesses, signal and imaging processing, inverse problems, mathematical  biology, large-scale scientific computing, mathematics of data science,  and probability and random matrix theory, game and decision theoretic  approaches to numerical approximation and learning, homogeniza -tion, multifidelity and multiscale analysis, and stochastic modeling and stochastic analysis, data assimilation, inverse problems, and related  branches of analysis.APPLIED MECHANICS Areas of Research Advanced instruction and research leading to degrees of Master of  Science and Doctor of Philosophy in applied mechanics are offered in  Areas of Study and Research 137such fields as elasticity; plasticity; wave propagation in solid media;  mechanics of quasi-static and dynamic fracture; dynamics and vibra -tions; finite element analysis; and stability, control, and system iden -tification of mechanical and structural systems. Research studies in  these areas that illustrate current interests include linear and nonlinear  random vibrations of uncertain dynamical systems; structural dynam-ics and control for earthquake and wind loads; linear and nonlinear  problems in static and dynamic elasticity, plasticity, and viscoelasticity;  computational mechanics; mechanics of time-dependent fracture;  chaotic behavior of dynamical systems; and material instabilities and phase transformations in solids.Physical FacilitiesIn addition to the regular facilities in the Division of Engineering and  Applied Science, which include extensive computing facilities, cer-tain special facilities have been developed in connection with applied mechanics activities. The vibration laboratory is equipped with a good selection of modern laboratory apparatus and instrumentation for  experimental research in shock and vibration. The earthquake engineer -ing research laboratory contains specialized equipment for vibration  tests of buildings, dams, and other structures, and for the recording  and analysis of strong-motion earthquakes. Solid mechanics laborato -ries contain extensive testing equipment for the study of fracture and  structural failure. Excellent computing facilities are available through the  campus computing network and in the specialized centers of various research groups. APPLIED PHYSICS The Applied Physics option was instituted in 1970 in order to provide  an interdivisional program for undergraduate and graduate students at  Caltech interested in the study of both pure and applied physics. The  small size of Caltech, coupled with its strength in the basic sciences  and engineering, has made it possible for faculty and students alike to pursue wide-ranging interests in the application of modern physics  to the development of new technology. Research efforts in applied  physics are driven by a fundamental understanding of the physical  principles underlying applications and a strong motivation to use this  knowledge to invent new experimental techniques, processes, devices  and materials. Core and affiliate faculty spanning several divisions on  campus participate in instruction and research leading to B.S., M.S.,  and Ph.D. degrees in applied physics.  This program is designed for undergraduate and graduate students  who wish to expand their training beyond the study of fundamental  physics to include research and development of real-world applications.  The training helps develop a solid foundation in physics through intro -ductory courses in classical physics, classical electrodynamics, quantum  mechanics, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and mathematical  physics. More advanced training is provided through coursework and  research activities in solid state physics, electromagnetic wave propa -Applied Physics138gation, optoelectronic materials and devices, transport phenomena in  hydrodynamic and condensed matter systems, plasma physics, biologi -cal physics, semiconductor principles and devices, quantum electronics,  and low-dimensional electronic systems.  Students are encouraged early on to develop strong experimental  skills for advanced laboratory work, including familiarity with numeri-cal computation for data and image analysis and software packages  for instrument automation. There exist many learning opportunities  along these lines, from courses in microfabrication and laboratory  work to independent research opportunities with various research  groups. Undergraduate students are encouraged to explore and will  find numerous opportunities for developing their research interests  into junior or senior thesis projects leading to publication.   Physical Facilities Research in applied physics covers a broad spectrum of activities  distributed across campus. Instructional and research activities of the  core faculty are housed in the Thomas J. Watson, Sr. Laboratories of  Applied Physics, a 40,000-square-foot building with state-of-the-art  research laboratories, a central microfabrication facility, faculty and  student offices, and a conference room and instructional classroom, all  nestled around a beautiful courtyard with a fountain pool.  Additional research laboratories and faculty and student offices are  located in the Harry G. Steele Laboratory of Electrical Sciences, built in 1965 with funds from the Harry G. Steele Foundation and the National  Science Foundation. The building, which is connected by an overhead bridge to the Watson Laboratories, conveniently also houses the Kavli  Nanoscience Institute.ASTROPHYSICS Caltech is one of the world™s preeminent centers of astronomical  research. This is due to the combination of excellent human resources  with premier observational facilities and computational infrastructure.  Fundamental discoveries in astronomy and astrophysics are a part of  Caltech™s past, present, and future. Students from either the astronomy or the physics options are best  prepared to undertake research with faculty in the Cahill Center for  Astronomy and Astrophysics. Students from related options such as  planetary science, computer science, applied physics, and electrical engineering are also welcome. Areas of Research Astronomy and astrophysics are synonymous at Caltech. Caltech sci -entists and students are involved in many frontier areas of research,  and have been known to open new ones. Research techniques include  observations, theory, numerical simulation, advanced data analysis,  laboratory astrophysics, and detector development. Projects and  groups often bridge these areas of inquiry. Topics of current research interest include: observational cosmology  Areas of Study and Research 139and the nature of dark matter and dark energy; studies of the cosmic  microwave background; galaxy formation and evolution; quasars and other  active galactic nuclei and radio sources; studies of the dynamics and com -position of galaxies and clusters; physics and evolution of the intergalactic  medium; interstellar matter; local star and planet formation; extrasolar  planetary systems; the structure of the galaxy; globular clusters; stellar  abundances; supernovae, gamma-ray bursts, and other types of cosmic  explosions and transient phenomena; neutron stars and black holes;  accretion disks; digital sky surveys and astroinformatics; numerical general  relativity; gravitational wave astronomy and many others. Research in planetary and solar system astronomy is often pursued  in cooperation with groups in the Division of Geological and Planetary  Sciences. New types of astronomical detectors and satellites, that can  revolutionize various areas of astronomical research, are developed with  groups in physics and colleagues at JPL. In addition to maintaining a leading numerical general relativity  group, Caltech theorists also use high-performance computing facilities  for simulations of supernova explosions, merging black holes, cosmic  structure formation, etc. Caltech is leading the development of novel  tools for knowledge discovery in massive and complex astronomical  data sets, many obtained with Caltech facilities.History and Current Science at Observational Facilities Observational astronomy is pursued both from the ground-based sites  and from space-based platforms. Caltech operates, or has access to an  unprecedented, comprehensive set of observational facilities, spanning  the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Caltech is also playing a key role in  opening a new window on the universe, the gravitational wave sky. Historically, Caltech™s pioneering role in astronomy started with  Palomar Observatory (about 190 km from campus), funded by the  Rockefeller Foundation. The first telescope on the mountain was an 18-inch Schmidt telescope built by Fritz Zwicky and used to conduct pioneering sky surveys for supernovae, potential planetary hazard  asteroids, etc. The 200-inch Hale Telescope, constructed through the  1930s and 1940s, has been used to make many historical, fundamental discoveries ever since its commissioning in 1948, including the dis-covery of quasars, and many studies of stellar populations, galaxies, intergalactic medium, etc., and it continues to produce excellent sci -ence. Novel detectors and instruments were developed there, e.g., the  first astronomical CCDs and infrared detectors as well as pioneering  advances in adaptive optics in addition to optical and infrared spec -troscopy. The 48-inch Samuel Oschin Telescope has made possible  complete surveys of the northern sky, initially with photographic plates  (including the historic POSS-I and POSS-II surveys), and now with large-format CCD array cameras. It is currently operating a uniquely  wide field, high-cadence program, the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF).  A much larger camera for this telescope, with a 47-square-degree field,  started operation in 2018, as the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF). The  60-inch telescope has been roboticized, and is used to monitor sources  discovered by sky surveys.  In the 1990s, funded mainly by the Keck Foundation, Caltech and Astrophysics 140University of California constructed two 10-m telescopes on Mauna  Kea, Hawaii. The W. M. Keck Observatory produced many recent dis -coveries in the fields of galaxy formation and evolution, intergalactic  medium, extrasolar planets, cosmic gamma-ray bursts, etc. Caltech is a founding partner in the development of the Thirty-Meter Telescope  (TMT), the first of the next generation of extremely large optical/infrared  telescopes.At meter to centimeter wavelengths, Caltech operates the Owens Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO) in a radio-quiet location about 400  km from Pasadena, near Big Pine, California. Its facilities include a  40-meter telescope, a growing 288 element long wavelength array  which can image the entire sky every second, and a 6.1 meter tele -scope dedicated to observations of polarized radio emission from  the galaxy. New radio and submm telescopes are in design and con -struction phases. From the 1980s until 2015, Caltech also operated  the Caltech 10-m Submillimeter Observatory (CSO) on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, and a series of millimeter interferometers, culminating in the  23-antenna Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy  (CARMA) in the Inyo Mountains. These telescopes, currently being  repurposed to new experiments, pioneered submm imaging and inter -ferometry and mm wave interferometry, now carried out by the interna -tional Atacama Large Millimeter/submm Array (ALMA).  In Antarctica, Caltech™s BICEP2 telescope, which measures the  imprint of inflation™s gravitational waves on the COSMIC microwave  background, has been expanded and renamed the Keck Array. On the space observations front, Caltech hosts NASA™s Spitzer  Science Center (SSC) and IPAC, which are principal national archives  for astronomy. Caltech scientists lead or actively participate in a num -ber of astrophysics missions, currently including the Spitzer Space  Telescope, and the NuSTAR hard X-ray mission. Caltech and the Jet  Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) are also leading the development of the  forthcoming SPHEREx mission, that will study the early stages of the universe, galaxy formation, and formation of planetary systems. There  are numerous close connections with JPL, that designs and operates  a number of NASA™s scientific missions. Finally, Caltech astronomers  are major users of NASA™s astronomical satellites, the Hubble Space  Telescope, Chandra, Fermi, Herschel, Planck, etc., ALMA and the  NSF™s Jansky Very Large Array (JVLA). Caltech is the headquarters for LIGO lab, which built and operates  the world™s most sensitive gravitational wave observatory, the Advanced  Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), which in  2015 made the historic first detection of gravitational waves from a black  hole binary. Several other black hole mergers have been detected since  then, as well as the first gravitational wave detection of a merger of two  neutron starts in 2017. Numerous other discoveries are expected as the  operations continue.Areas of Study and Research 141BIOCHEMISTRY AND  MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICSThe Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics (BMB) option has been established as an interdisciplinary program, at the interface of biology,  chemistry, and physics, that seeks to understand the chemistry of life.  Thus, BMB students study the atomic structure and folding of biopoly -mers; their interactions with each other and with small molecules; and the roles of particular biopolymers and biopolymer assemblies in cellu -lar physiology. The basic building block of life is the cell; the intellectual  focus of modern biochemistry and molecular biophysics is to under -stand how individual parts interact to give cells their wide spectrum  of functions. In particular, biochemistry and molecular biophysics  addresses the principles through which the individual components of cells  combine in an orderly self-association to produce their form, their func -tion, and their dynamic behavior. Areas of Research General areas of research represented within the option include signal  transduction, cell cycle, DNA and RNA structure and metabolism, control  of gene transcription during development, protein folding, biogenesis and  quality control, electron transport proteins and bioenergetics, biological  catalysis, macromolecular structure, membrane proteins, and biotechnol -ogy and biomolecular engineering. More specific examples of biological  phenomena currently under study include the transduction of signals  received by cell surface receptors into an appropriate response, as in che -motaxis or transmission of signals across synapses in the nervous system;  the replication of DNA; the biochemical networks that control initiation and  termination of cell division; the controlled transcription of DNA sequences  in the genome into RNA and the processing of this RNA into mRNA and  the subsequent translation into protein; energetic principles and molecular  mechanisms that underlie the biogenesis of nascent proteins and mainte -nance of protein homeostasis in the cell; the molecular mechanisms con -trolling the differentiation of precursor cells into specialized cells such as  neurons, lymphocytes, and muscle cells; the mechanisms by which synap -tic transmission in the brain is regulated during thinking and the formation  of memories; the processes, driven by fundamental principles of chemical  bonding and molecular energetics, by which a given linear sequence of  amino acids folds into a specific three-dimensional structure in the appro -priate cellular environment; how electrons move within a cell to accomplish  the many redox reactions necessary for life; how light is harvested by pho -to-pigments and is perceived in vision; the function of integral membrane  proteins in energy and signal transduction processes; and the mechanisms  by which enzymes both efficiently and specifically catalyze biochemical  interconversions. This fundamental understanding of the molecular basis  of biological processes provides a powerful base for the development of  applications in medicine, including biotechnology and rational drug design,  and in the chemical industry, where nucleic acids, proteins, and their ana -logs are now being used in the development of chemical systems for novel  applications, and where mutagenesis and selection systems are used to  produce novel materials. Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics142BIOENGINEERING Bioengineering research at Caltech focuses on the application of  engineering principles to the design, analysis, construction, and  manipulation of biological systems, and on the discovery and appli -cation of new engineering principles inspired by the properties of  biological systems.  Areas of Research Ł Bioimaging (Cai, Dickinson, Gharib, Lester, Meyerowitz, Pierce,  Shapiro, Yang)  Biophotonics, advanced imaging technologies, computational image analysis, noninvasive biomedical imaging, single-molecule technologies, flow-field imaging technologies, in situ amplifica-tion.Ł Bioinspired Design (Gharib, Greer, Hajimiri, Ismagilov, Murray,  Shapiro, Tirrell, Winfree)  Engineering physiological machines, engineering self-powered  technologies, control systems, synthetic heteropolymers, and  self-healing circuits and systems. Ł Biomechanics (Bhattacharya, Dickinson, Gharib, Greer,  Meyerowitz, Phillips, Roukes)  Molecular and cellular biophysics, cardiovascular mechanics,  muscle and membrane mechanics, physiology and mechanics offlapping flight, multicellular morphodynamics, cell-biomaterial  interactions. Ł Biomedical Devices (Burdick, Emami, Gharib, Hajimiri, Heath,  Ismagilov, Meister, Roukes, Shapiro, Siapas, Tai, Yang)  BioNEMS, BioMEMS, laboratories-on-a-chip including micro -fluidic systems, neural networks, microscopes and diagnostics,  novel measurement principles, neural interfaces and prostheses,  locomotion rehabilitation, molecular imaging during surgery. Ł Cell and Tissue Engineering  (Arnold, Elowitz, Gharib, Gradinaru,  Ismagilov, Shapiro, Tirrell)  Multicellular morphodynamics, principles of feedback between tissue mechanics and genetic expression, non-natural protein  biomaterials, cell-biomaterial interactions, developmental pat-terning. Ł Molecular Medicine (Baltimore, Bjorkman, Davis, Deshaies,  Gradinaru, Hay, Ismagilov, Lester, Mazmanian, Pierce)  Engineering immunity, cancer vaccines, AIDS vaccine, novel  anti-cancer therapeutics, Parkinson™s disease, schizophrenia,  Huntington™s disease, nicotine addiction, microbiome pertur -bations in disease, molecular basis of autism, programmable  chemotherapies, conditional chemotherapies, nanoparticle drug delivery.  Ł Molecular Programming (Aravin, Murray, Pierce, Qian,  Rothemund, Winfree)   Abstractions, languages, algorithms, and compilers for program -ming nucleic acid function, molecular information processing,  molecular complexity theory, free-energy landscapes, metasta -Areas of Study and Research 143ble systems, self-assembly across length scales, algorithmic  self-assembly, synthetic molecular motors, in vitro and in vivo  nucleic acid circuits.  Ł Synthetic Biology (Aravin, Arnold, Elowitz, Gradinaru, Ismagilov,  Murray, Pierce, Qian, Rothemund, Shapiro, Tirrell, Winfree)  Principles of biological circuit design, genetic circuits, protein  engineering, noncanonical amino acids, nucleic acid engineer-ing, rational design, directed evolution, metabolic engineering,  biofuels, biocatalysts, elucidation of systems biology principles using synthetic systems.Ł Systems Biology (Aravin, Cai, Doyle, Elowitz, Goentoro,  Heath, Ismagilov, Lester, Meister, Meyerowitz, Murray, Phillips,  Sternberg, Winfree)  Roles of circuit architecture and stochasticity in cellular decision  making, feedback, control, and complexity in biological net -works, multicellular morphodynamics, principles of developmen-tal circuitry including signal integration and coordination, spatial  patterning and organ formation, principles of feedback between  tissue mechanics and genetic expression, neural development,  and disease.  BIOLOGYRecent dramatic progress in our understanding of the nature of life has  revolutionized the science of biology. Applications of the methods, con -cepts, and approaches of modern mathematics, physics, chemistry, and  information science are providing deep insight into basic biological prob -lems such as the manner in which genes and viruses replicate themselves;  the control of gene expression in cells; the regulation of cellular activity; the  mechanisms of growth and development; and the nature and interactions  of nerve activity, brain function, and behavior. Qualified experimental and  computational biologists will find opportunities for challenging work in  basic research as well as in medicine and in biotechnology. Because of the eminent position of Caltech in both the physical and biological sciences, students at the Institute have an unusual opportu-nity to be introduced to modern biology. Areas of Research Research (and graduate work leading to the Ph.D. degree) is chiefly in  the following fields: biochemistry, biophysics, cell biology, developmen -tal biology, genetics, genomics and computational biology, immunol -ogy, microbiology, molecular biology, neurobiology, structural biology,  and systems biology. Biochemical methodology plays an important  role in many of these fields, and there is extensive interaction with  related programs in biochemistry within the Division of Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering, including the biochemistry and molecular bio-physics option.The programs in cellular, molecular, and developmental biology  are based upon approaches derived from biochemistry, biophysics,  and genetics that offer new possibilities for expanded insight into  Biology144long-standing problems. Neurobiology is a major area of emphasis  within the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering. A com-prehensive program of research and instruction in neurobiology has  been formulated to span from molecular and cellular neurobiology to  the study of animal and human behavior, including the computational  modeling of neural processes.  A geobiology option is described in the geological and planetary  sciences section.Physical FacilitiesThe campus biological laboratories are housed in seven buildings:  the William G. Kerckhoff Laboratories of the Biological Sciences,  the Gordon A. Alles Laboratory for Molecular Biology, the Norman  W. Church Laboratory for Chemical Biology, the Mabel and Arnold  Beckman Laboratories of Behavioral Biology, the Braun Laboratories  in Memory of Carl F and Winifred H Braun, the Beckman Institute, and  the Broad Center for the Biological Sciences. They contain classrooms  and undergraduate laboratories, as well as research laboratories where  both undergraduate and graduate students work in collaboration with  faculty members. Special facilities include rooms for the culturing of  mutant types of Drosophila, a monoclonal antibody production facility,  a fluorescence-activated cell sorter facility, scanning and transmission  electron microscopes, a confocal microscope facility, a magnetic res -onance imaging center, a transgenic mouse facility, a high throughput  sequencing and microarray analysis facility, and a protein expres -sion and purification center. About 50 miles from Pasadena, in Corona del Mar, is the William  G. Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory. This laboratory provides facilities for  research in cellular and molecular biology using marine animals, and for  collecting and maintaining these animals.CHEMICAL ENGINEERING The chemical engineering faculty teach and conduct research on  fundamental chemical, biological, and transport processes and their  application in understanding, designing, and controlling a broad  spectrum of complex chemical, biochemical, and environmental  processes. The faculty and students utilize their analytical skills and  laboratory resources to study diverse processes and to synthesize new materials. The combination of engineering principles, chemis -try, biology, physics, and mathematics that characterizes chemical  engineering at Caltech enables students and faculty to contribute to  the solution of a wide range of critical problems and to aid in creat-ing new areas of science and technology.Areas of Research Many different research areas are offered to students seeking the degrees of Master of Science or Doctor of Philosophy in chemical engineering. Particular research fields emphasized in the department include the following:Areas of Study and Research 145Ł Biological Design and Engineering. Protein engineering by evolu -tion and machine learning. New-to-nature biocatalysis for sustain -able production of pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals. Gene  editing and genome engineering of plants.Ł Fluid Mechanics and Transport Processes.  Mechanics of polymer-ic liquids, microstructured fluids, colloidal dispersions and suspen -sions, and granular media. Transport in heterogeneous media. Ł Polymer Physics and Chemistry.  Molecular understanding of poly-mer melts, gels and solutions. Optical and rheological properties  of polymers. Dynamic modeling of polymer structure and rheology.  Synthesis of tailored polymers by chemical and biological means. Ł Biomaterials. Synthesis and properties of organic materials  designed for use in living systems. Therapeutic modification of  existing systems.Ł Cellular Engineering. Quantitative analysis and redesign of molec -ular events governing cell behavior. Plant synthetic biology, bioengi -neering, and biotechnology.  Ł Catalysis and Biocatalysis. Synthesis of molecular sieves and  organic-inorganic hybrid materials. Synthesis of inorganic mem -branes for gas separations and catalysis. Biological routes to the  synthesis of chemicals.Ł Chemical Dynamics and Surfaces: Kinetic-energy-driven,  non-catalytic reactions with applications in plasma processing and  astrophysical environments. Eley-Rideal reactions and collision-in -duced dissociation at surfaces. Water-splitting and carbon dioxide  dissociation at oxides.Ł Complex networks of reactions, cell, and organisms in space and  time. Studies of microbial communities in environment and interac -tions of microbial communities with their human host. Ł Microfluidics. Science of single molecules and cells. Fundamental  studies of fluid flow and interfacial phenomena. Engineering of  solutions to diagnostic and therapeutic problems in Global Health,  including antibiotic resistance. Ł Nanotechnology.  Aerosol synthesis of nanoparticles for micro-elec -tronic and photovoltaic applications. Electrospraying and electro -spinning of nanostructured electrolytic materials for energy conver -sion and desalination. Novel electrodes for fuel cells, batteries, and  super capacitors. Nano-membranes. Nanoparticales for biomole-cule delivery to plants.  Ł Environmental Chemical Engineering. Physics and chemistry of  atmospheric gases and aerosols, bioaerosols, climate change,  bioldegradation of persistent chemicals. Sustainable agriculture  through rhizosphere engineering. Ł Aerosols and Colloids. Nucleation and growth of particles. Particle  formation and reactions. Structure and properties of colloidal dis -persions. Aerosol and colloidal particle characterization. Ł Applied Mathematics and Computational Physics.  Supercomputer applications in fluid mechanics and environmental  modeling. Concurrent computing. Asymptotic analyses of transport  processes. Data analysis and machine learning. Ł Physics of Complex Fluids and Soft Matter. Structures, phase  Chemical Engineering146transitions, and dynamics of polymers, liquid crystals, surfactant  solutions, gels, colloidal dispersions and active matter. Ł Nanoscale Thermodynamics and Dynamics. Flow and crystal-ization of materials in nanoscale confinement. Wall effects, lattice  melting, capillary condensation. Structure, transport and charging/ discharging in confined electrolytes.  Physical FacilitiesThe chemical engineering laboratories, mainly housed in the Eudora Hull Spalding Laboratory of Engineering and the Warren and Katharine  Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, are well  equipped. The facilities include experimental reactors, computational  facilities, NMR spectrometers, and numerous special research equip -ment for molecular simulations, DNA synthesis, and electronic, optical,  and chemical measurements. CHEMISTRY  Caltech offers exciting opportunities for study and research at the  frontiers of chemical science. With approximately 30 faculty, the  chemistry program provides depth in the traditional areas of chemis -tryŠorganic and inorganic chemistry, chemical physics, theoretical  chemistry, and chemical biology. Research areas include chemical  synthesis and catalysis, chemical dynamics and reaction mech-anisms, biochemistry, bioinorganic, bioorganic, and biophysical  chemistry, and materials chemistry. Chemical research at Caltech  is also highly interdisciplinary, mirroring the increasing importance  of molecular understanding in many fields of science. Active inter -actions exist between chemistry and other disciplines at Caltech,  especially applied physics, biology, chemical engineering, environ -mental science, geological and planetary sciences, and materials  science. Major initiatives are fostering broad collaborations in energy  and environment, molecular medicine, and nanomaterials. Teaching is an important component of the chemistry option.  Caltech has trained generations of chemists who have become leaders in academia, industry, and government, through undergraduate and  graduate programs that are designed to encourage the greatest possi -ble amount of freedom, creativity, and flexibility.  Areas of Research Caltech has a long and continuing reputation for excellence in funda -mental chemistry in molecular structure and the nature of chemical  bonding. Much of the current research in chemistry is directed at  establishing and manipulating the mechanisms of reactions of fun -damental chemical and biological significance. Programs in chemical  physics emphasize studies of molecular dynamics and structure using  techniques that include femtosecond lasers, molecular beams, ultra-high sensitivity spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry, while novel  methods such as ultrafast electron diffraction and force-detected  magnetic resonance are being developed and applied to systems of  Areas of Study and Research 147increasing complexity. Interdisciplinary research includes the develop -ment of powerful approaches to fabricate, assemble, and utilize nano -meter-scale structures; spectroscopy and fundamental chemical mech -anisms of reactions in Earth and planetary atmospheres, star formation,  and interstellar chemistry; the dynamics of phase transitions; and novel methods in mass spectrometry.  Catalysis by transition metals represents a central area of research  in the inorganic and organometallic areas. Current research interests  include the uses of transition metal complexes as homogeneous and  heterogeneous catalysts for polymer synthesis, solar energy conversion  and storage, and methane and water oxidation. Reactions of molecules  on surfaces are an important focus, especially on semiconductors.  Research in bioorganic and bioinorganic chemistry includes the chem -ical basis of synaptic transmission by ion channels; investigations of  molecular recognition and sequence-specific ligand binding to DNA;  DNA-mediated charge transport; and design of artificial transcription  activators.  Chemical synthesis, a key part of much of the research described  above, is the primary research goal of several groups, and includes  projects aimed at the synthesis of complex organic molecules of  importance in biology and human medicine. These efforts include  development of new and synthetically useful chemical transformations mediated by novel organic and transition metal-based catalysts. The  division has an exceptional program in polymer science, with emphasis  on the development of strategies and methodologies for the synthesis of  designed polymers using chemical- and biological-based approaches.  The theoretical chemistry program ranges from fundamental studies  of electron transfer to excited states and reaction dynamics of small  molecules, to simulations of biological systems and materials. In these  studies, theoretical techniques are being developed to provide detailed  understanding of electron transfer processes, proton transfer reactions,  energy randomization processes within molecules, and the dynamics  of reacting systems. Computer simulations are addressing ever more  complex systems, ranging from metals and superconductors to soft  materials and biomolecules.Research in biochemistry and molecular biology within the chem -istry division exists within the larger framework of biochemical studies at  Caltech, and includes crystallographic and spectroscopic analyses of  macromolecule structures; studies on the design, folding, and stability  of macromolecules; the mechanisms of enzyme catalysis and allosteric  transitions; interactions between proteins and nucleic acids; macromo -lecular assemblies mediating replication, transcription, and protein bio -synthesis; the mechanism and functional role of protein glycosylation;  and mechanisms of ion and electron transport in biological membranes. Physical FacilitiesThe laboratories of chemistry consist of eight units providing space  for about 25 research groups, including 300 graduate students and post -doctoral research fellows. Crellin and Gates laboratories house several  research groups, the divisional instrumentation facilities, and the divisional  administrative offices. Synthetic research groups occupy the Arnold Chemistry148and Mabel Beckman Laboratory of Chemical Synthesis and Church laboratories. The Braun Laboratories and the Broad Center for the Biological Sciences house biochemical groups and are shared with the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering. The Arthur Amos  Noyes Laboratory of Chemical Physics is one of the major research  facilities for chemical physics and inorganic chemistry and is adjoined  by the Clifford S. and Ruth A. Mead Memorial Undergraduate Chemistry  Laboratory. Chemistry groups recently joined several chemical engineer-ing colleagues in the new Warren and Katharine Schlinger Laboratory  for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. A number of resource centers  serving researchers of the division are located in the Beckman Institute.CIVIL ENGINEERINGCivil engineering includes the research, development, planning,  design, and construction associated with the infrastructure of the  built environment. Dealing with the function and safety of such  facilities as buildings, bridges, pipelines, dams, power plants, and  harbors, it is concerned with the protection of the public against nat-ural hazards such as earthquakes, winds, floods, landslides, water  waves, and fires.Recent advances in technology, the escalation of urban problems,  and the exploration of space have broadened the applications of  civil engineering, increasing the scope of research. New problems have  presented special challenges to the civil engineer well-trained in the  fundamentals of their profession. For this reason, in the advanced  study of civil engineering at the Institute, the application of fundamental scientific principles and mathematics is emphasized for the solution of engineering problems. Areas of Research Graduate work leading to advanced degrees lies chiefly in the follow -ing fields: structural engineering and structural dynamics; earthquake engineering; applied mechanics; geotechnical engineering; aerospace  structures; and environmental engineering (see also environmental sci -ence and engineering). In the past few years, graduate students and members of the faculty have pursued a variety of research programs,  including the analysis of structures subjected to earthquakes and other  dynamic loadings; optimal performance-based structural design; sys-tem identification and control of structures; structural health monitoring;  the use of finite element methods for structural analysis; seismic risk and structural reliability; earthquake early warning systems; mechanics  of soil and other granular materials; and mechanics of space structures.  Students whose interests are in environmental problems may enroll for  graduate degrees in either civil engineering or environmental science  and engineering.Physical FacilitiesCivil engineering activities are housed in two buildings: the Gates-Thomas Laboratory and the W. M. Keck Engineering Laboratories.. Areas of Study and Research 149Excellent computing facilities are available through the campus computing network and in the specialized computing centers of various  research groups. Seismic instrumentation networks include the Southern  California Seismic Network and the Community Seismic Network.COMPUTATION AND NEURAL SYSTEMS What does the brain compute? How does it do it? And why? Faculty and students in the CNS option study how information is acquired and processed by the brain. They are also interested in designing  machines that are adaptable, intelligent, and autonomous. The uni -fying theme of the program is the study of the relationship between  the physical structure of a computational system (synthetic or natu -ral hardware), the dynamics of its operation and its interaction with  the environment, and the computations that it carries out.Areas of interest include coding and computation in networks of neu -rons, sensory systems (vision, audition, olfaction), learning and memory,  control and motor behavior, and planning and decision making. Thus,  CNS is an interdisciplinary option that benefits from, and integrates,  multiple traditional areas of expertise: molecular, cellular, neural, and sys -tems biology, electrical and mechanical engineering, computer science,  psychology, and cognition, applied mathematics, and physics. Faculty in the program belong to the Division of Biology and  Biological Engineering, Division of Engineering and Applied Science,  Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, and Division of the  Humanities and Social Sciences. They have an interest in develop -ing conceptual frameworks and analytical approaches for tackling  seemingly disparate problems that share a common deep structure  at the computational level. Students in the program will partake of a  wide-ranging curriculum that will promote a broad understanding of  neurobiology, sensory psychology, cognitive science, computational  hardware and software, and information theory. Areas of Research Areas of research include the neuron as a computational device; the  theory of collective neural circuits for biological and machine compu -tations; algorithms and architectures that enable efficient fault-tolerant  parallel and distributed computing; learning theory and systems, pat -tern recognition, information theory, and computational complexity;  computational modeling and analysis of information processing in  biochemical and neural networks; the design and use of synthetic mac-romolecules as computational devices; light and magnetic resonance  imaging of cell lineages, cell migrations, and axonal connections in the forming nervous system; learning, plasticity, and memory; experi -mental and modeling studies of localization and recognition by sensory  systems (vision, olfaction, audition) in insects and vertebrates on the  basis of electrophysiology, psychophysics, and functional imaging  techniques; multiunit recordings in behaving animals; neuroprosthetic  devices and recording methods in animals and humans; imaging and  stimulation of cortical areas in humans and other primates using func -Computation and Neural Systems150tional MRI, TMS, and tDCS; decision making, attention, awareness,  emotion, and consciousness in the primate brain using a combination  of neurophysiological, psychophysical, and computer modeling tech -niques; cognitive psychology; and the study of evolution in natural and  artificial systems.COMPUTER SCIENCEComputing is a ubiquitous tool in all areas of study and research at  Caltech. Computer science focuses on the theory and technology  of computation itself: it is the study of information, and of the structures  that communicate, store, and procegs information. Whether these struc -tures are expressed in hardware and called machines, in software and  called programs, or in nature or society, the fundamental concepts are  similar.  Students of the computer science option within the Computing & Mathematical Sciences department at Caltech do not specialize along traditional lines that divide hardware and software, systems and appli -cations, or theory and experiment. Rather, a unified approach to the  design and analysis of computing structures is taken both in courses  and in research. Managing the great complexity of useful systems  requires a representation of computations amenable to both mathe -matical treatment and implementation. Whether the system is artificially  designed (such as a multi-core processor), or naturally occurring (such  as a molecule), the computer scientist formalizes the computation per-formed by the system and provides a systematic analysis of its require -ments and formal guarantees on its outcomes. Areas of Research Research and advanced courses leading to the Ph.D. degree in com -puter science are concentrated in the following areas: quantum and  molecular computation; parallel and distributed computation; theory  of computation; information theory; machine learning and applications;  computational economics; computer vision; computer graphics; discrete  differential geometry; networking and power systems. Research  projects frequently involve work in several of these areas, with both the -oretical and experimental aspects, as well as connections with such fields  as mathematics, physics, biology, economics, and electrical engineering.  Crosscutting themes include: Ł Physical Implementation of Computations. Computations must ultimately be implemented in some physical medium (e.g., semi-conductor electronics, DNA self-assembly, quantum states of  elementary particles, molecular electronics). Caltech has been  a leader in the early development, engineering, and design  of very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuits. Beyond VLSI,  efforts are under way to understand quantum, biomolecular,  and molecular electronic substrates as possible media for future  computing machines. As was the case with semiconductor elec -tronics, Caltech computing can draw on the world-class expertise  of its biology, physics, and chemistry departments as it tackles  Areas of Study and Research 151the many challenging opportunities that these new substrates present. Ł Robust Modeling of Physical Systems. Caltech computer sci-ence has a unique focus in developing rigorous and robust models  of the physical world. These models are mathematically and physi -cally sound, often derived from differential geometric principles,  and serve as a basis for computer graphics and vision research,  as well as the simulation of mechanical, optical, and biological sys-tems.Ł Systematic Design. A key theme in the Caltech computer sci-ence option is the systematic design of systems at all levels. This theme shows up in the design of numerical algorithms for  physical simulation and computer graphics, design of concurrent  and distributed systems, abstractions for physical computing substrates, design of learning systems, design of programming  languages, automated optimization of computations for both software and hardware implementation, as well as control and  optimization of networks. The success of computer systems has allowed the building of systems of unprecedented scale and  complexity. These systems can only be understood and managed if  we carefully contain the complexity involved by systematically defin -ing and exploring their design space.  Ł Theory.  A strong theoretical understanding is the necessary  foundation for systematic design, analysis, and verification. The  theory of computation focuses on deep mathematical problems,  many of which have substantial technological impact. Theory in computer science at Caltech includes traditional areas such  as complexity algorithms, theories of numerical computation, optimization, probability, and game theory. But theory is not  relegated to a single group, and has strong connections to all  disciplines represented at Caltech.  Ł Networks & Distributed Systems. Modern networks and dis -tributed systems are undoubtedly the most complex and critical  pieces of infrastructure that the world has created. This includes  communication networks as well as power networks, social networks, cloud computing, and more. The massive scale and  exponential growth of such networks presents unique algo -rithmic, computational, and economic challenges. Research at  Caltech approaches these challenges through a combination of  rigorous design, systematic analysis, and interdisciplinary col -laboration.Ł Machine Learning. In our increasingly data-rich world, it is  more important than ever to develop principled approaches  that can intelligently convert raw data into actionable knowl-edge. At Caltech, we take a broad and integrated view of  research in data-driven intelligent systems. The Decision,  Optimization and Learning group brings together researchers  from machine learning, optimization, applied math, statistics,  control, robotics, distributed systems and human-computer  interaction to form an intellectual core pertaining fundamen -tal and applied research from statistical machine learning to  Computer Science152statistical decision theory through optimization. Ł Interdisciplinary Research. Computer simulations, modeling,  and analysis are key enablers, allowing all fields of science  to advance rapidly. Furthermore, insights into computational  management of information helps us understand information processing issues in natural systems (from cells and neurons to  financial markets and social networks) and build hypothetical  models that advance our understanding of natural cognition.  These relations provide many opportunities for scholars in  computer science to work closely with colleagues throughout  Caltech. The Information Science and Technology (IST) initia -tive facilitates and promotes such interdisciplinary research  (see ist.caltech.edu).Physical FacilitiesThe computer science option has excellent computing facilities ranging from high-performance workstations to multiprocessors and supercom-puters. The Computing & Mathematical Sciences department maintains a large computer lab open to students and offers a large collection of software for a wide range of applications. Students have easy access to state-of-the-art equipment. The Institute libraries maintain a large collection of journals in computer science and related fields.COMPUTING AND MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES Data-driven modeling is becoming increasingly critical in diverse  application domains such as machine learning, vision, control sys -tems, biological and engineered networks, neuroscience, econom -ics, and privacy, as well as in many areas of the physical sciences, including high energy physics, earthquake modeling, astronomy,  and exploration geophysics. There is enormous potential for  research on data-intensive activity of this type, which is highlight -ed by the emergence of new fields such as ﬁBig Data,ﬂ ﬁDecision  Science,ﬂ and ﬁNetwork Science.ﬂ However, the theoretical founda-tions of these subjects remain underdeveloped, limiting our under -standing and development. The mission of the CMS graduate program is to address this need by  exploring and developing the fundamental mathematical, computational,  and economic tools necessary to advance data-intensive science and  engineering. That is, we aim to forge the algorithmic foundations neces -sary to move from data, to information, to action. Key to this mission is  a core focus on ﬁalgorithmic thinking.ﬂ Algorithms are not just the basis  for advanced technology, they are intrinsic components of diverse fields  such as biology, physics, and economics. Studying the structures and  mechanisms that communicate, store, and process information from  this viewpointŠwhether these structures are expressed in hardware and  called machines, in software and called programs, in abstract notation  and called mathematics, or in nature and society and called biological or  Areas of Study and Research 153social networks and marketsŠis crucial to pushing scientific boundaries.  Simply put, it is almost impossible to do research in any scientific or  engineering discipline without the ability to think algorithmically. Because of the diversity of fields where algorithmic thinking is fun -damental, there are broad differences in how algorithms are formalized,  applied, and studied across areas. Over the years, these differences  have been codified and the ﬁlanguage of algorithmsﬂ is actually quite distinct across, e.g., computer science, applied math, and electrical  engineering. However, a broad view of algorithmic thinking is crucial to  scientific breakthrough; and the goal of this program is to train scholars  to have an interdisciplinary, cross-cutting view of algorithms. Faculty and students in CMS are active in a broad array of research  areas. Some of these include algorithms, complexity, algorithmic eco -nomics, feedback and control, inference and statistics, information sys -tems, machine learning, networked systems, vision, optimization, quan -tum information, scientific computing, and uncertainty quantification.CONTROL AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  Some of the most exciting interactions between mathematics and engi-neering are occurring in the area of analysis and control of uncertain, mul -tivariable, and nonlinear dynamical systems. While changing technology  has made control and dynamical systems theory increasingly relevant  to a much broader class of problems, the interdisciplinary nature of this  area means that it no longer has a natural home exclusively or even pri -marily within any one of the traditional engineering disciplines. The CDS  option, as part of the Computing & Mathematical Sciences department, is  designed to meet the challenge of educating students both in the mathe-matical methods of control and dynamical systems theory and their appli -cations to problems in engineering and science. Faculty and students in CDS are active in a number of research areas.  The primary theoretical areas of research include stochastic and nonlinear  dynamical systems, multiscale modeling, optimal and decentralized con-trol, system identification and estimation theory, Bayesian modeling and  analysis, uncertainty quantification, and communications and information  theory. Active applications include networking and communication sys -tems, embedded systems and formal verification, robotics and autonomy,  molecular and systems biology, integrative biology, human physiology,  economic and financial systems, computing systems, physics of fluids,  quantum mechanics, seismology and earthquake engineering, and space  systems.ELECTRICAL ENGINEERINGElectrical engineering at Caltech emphasizes both devices and sys-tems. Closely allied with computation and neural systems, applied physics, bioengineering, computer science, and control and dynamical  systems, it offers students the opportunity for study and research, both  theoretical and experimental, in a wide variety of subjects, including  wireless systems, photonics, quantum information science, modern  Electrical Engineering154optics, biophotonics, MEMS/NEMS, solid-state materials and devic-es, power electronics, energy systems, control theory, data science,  nanoscale systems, signal processing, learning, data compression, and  communications.  Areas of Research and Physical Facilities Substantial experimental laboratory facilities, housed mainly in the Moore Laboratory of Engineering, are associated with each of the  research fields described on the following pages.  Bio-Electronics, Bio-Optics, and Medical Imaging    (Azita Emami, Ali Hajimiri, Alireza Marandi, Axel Scherer,     Yu-Chong Tai, Lihong Wang, Changhuei Yang)  Electrical engineering has broadly impacted biomedicine.  Integrated circuits are used to detect biological matters, such  as DNA and proteins, in various (e.g., electrical, magnetic, opti -cal) sensing modes with high sensitivity. Applications include  microarrays and point-of-care. MEMS and nanotechnologies are  developed for a new generation of micro-implants. Examples  include retinal implants, drug delivery pumps, and bio-analyte  sensors. Optical technologies are developed for medical imag -ing. Current areas of interest include optofluidics, wavefront  shaping, wide field-of-view imaging, chip-scale microscopy,  Fourier ptychographic microscopy, photoacoustic tomography,  microwave-induced thermoacoustic tomography, and light- speed compressed ultrafast tomography.  Circuits and VLSI  (Azita Emami, Ali Hajimiri) Analysis, design, simulation, verification, and testing of inte-grated circuits for various applications, such as high-speed  and wireless communications, wireless local-area networks,  highly stable frequency sources, distributed integrated circuit  design techniques for ultrahigh speed silicon-based circuits,  system and circuit design for multi- band systems, single-chip  spectrum analyzers, performance limitation of A/D and D/A data converters, and robust circuit- design techniques. Projects also  include millimeter-wave silicon-based circuits and arrays, flexible  and lightweight arrays, wireless power transfer at distance, sili -con-photonics and electronics integration, self-healing circuits,  high frequency power generation in CMOS, analysis and design  of distributed circuits, multimode reconfigurable systems, as  well as modeling of the effect of substrate and supply noise in  large integrated circuits and design techniques to minimize their  effect, examination of integrated passive structures and their  fundamental performance limits, and noise modeling in ampli-fiers, mixers, and oscillators. More information can be found  atchic.caltech.edu and mics.caltech.edu. Control and Learning  (Venkat Chandrasekaran; John Doyle; Babak  Hassibi; Victoria Kostina; Steven Low; Joel Burdick, Mechanical  & Civil Engineering; Richard Murray, Control & Dynamical  Systems) Theoretical research is conducted in all aspects of control, with  emphasis on robustness, multivariable and nonlinear systems,  Areas of Study and Research 155optimal control, networked control with information constraints,  learning for dynamical systems, online learning and control, con -trol-theoretic perspectives on deep learning, and reinforcement  learning Theoretical developments are applied to a wide variety  of areas, including internet, autonomous systems, wireless,  power systems, cell biology, autonomy, neuroscience, medical  physiology, turbulence, wildfire ecology, earthquakes, economics  and finance, and foundations of physics. Ł Devices (Ali Hajimiri, Alireza Marandi, Axel Scherer, Yu-Chong  Tai, Lihong Wang, Changhuei Yang, Amnon Yariv)  Research on devices in the Electrical Engineering department  deals with a variety of fundamental topics including semiconduc-tor physics, quantum mechanics, electromagnetics, and optics  for developing hardware technologies for applications includ -ing sensing, communication, computing, and imaging. These devices can range in size from kilometer scale (such as antenna  arrays for radio astronomy), to nano scale (such as building  blocks of electronic and photonic integrated circuits).  Electromagnetics, RF, Microwave Circuits, and Antennas  (Azita Emami, Andrei Faraon, Ali Hajimiri, Mohammad Mirhosseini,  Sander Weinreb)  Electromagnetics spans most aspects of electrical engineering  (and everyday life) from RF, microwave, and mm-wave to infrared  and visible optical systems that form the underlying platforms for many of modern marvels. Research involves theoretical study,  design, and implementation of devices and systems, such as resonators, radiators, and arrays in microwave and mm-waves,  as well as silicon photonics integrated circuits in conjunction  with active high speed electronics and photonics integrated cir -cuits. Some examples of such systems include optical phased arrays (OPA) transmitters and receivers, lightweight flexible  deployable active phased arrays for communications and power transferm, multimodality quantum computing qubits, and radio astronomy receivers and arrays. This area includes strong the -oretical investigations as well as extensive experimental work in  realization of these systems in practice.  Hassibi, Steven Low, Guillaume Blanquart (Mechanical & Civil  Engineering), Adam Wierman (Computing & Mathematical Sciences)  Energy research at Caltech encompasses control, optimization,  and economics of energy systems, especially future smart grid.  The goal is to develop a thorough understanding of the world™s  largest and most complex cyber-physical network as well as  an intellectual basis for its transformation into a more sustain -able, dynamic, and open system. Current research spans opti -mal power flow problems, convex relaxations, electric vehicle  charging, wireless power transfer, space solar power, energy  storage, power system dynamics and control, electricity mar -kets, nonconvex pricing, market power, and cascading failure. Electrical Engineering156Information and Data Science (Katie Bouman, Venkat  Chandrasekaran, Babak Hassibi, Victoria Kostina)  The information and data sciences are concerned with the  acquisition, storage, communication, processing, and analysis of  data. These intellectual activities have a long history at Caltech both in electrical engineering as well as in allied areas such as  applied mathematics. Current research centers around activity  at the interface of statistical inference, inverse problems, and  machine learning, and has significant synergies with ongoing  efforts in information theory and signal processing. Information Theory (Yaser Abu-Mostafa, Jehoshua (Shuki)  Bruck, Michelle Effros, Babak Hassibi, Victoria Kostina, P.P.  Vaidyanathan)  Theoretical work in a wide range of problems involving trans -mission, storage and manipulation of information, with strong  links to optimization, statistics, control, learning, and wireless  communications. Current research foci include bitrate/energy  efficiency of computing systems, coding for control, computing  with stochastic circuits, error correcting codes for digital storage,  coding for delay-sensitive systems, feedback communications, multi-user information theory, parameter estimation with uncon -ventional sampling strategies, random access communications, and random asynchronous computations.  Learning, Pattern Recognition, and Neural Networks  (Yaser Abu- Mostafa, Katie Bouman, Jehoshua [Shuki] Bruck, Michelle Effros,  Pietro Perona)  Theoretical and applied research in machine learning. Current  theoretical research directions include estimating the information  (data and hints) needed to learn a given task, characterizing the  computational complexity of computing with neural networks, and modeling how biological networks of neurons create brain  function. Current applied research directions include applica -tions of ML in biology and medicine, in computational imaging, in e-commerce and profiling applications, and in computation -al finance. Examples of recent projects include a data-driven  approach to predicting the spread of COVID-19 in every U.S.  county (Abu-Mostafa), an ML approach to medical diagnostics  using low-resolution ultrasound (Abu-Mostafa), a learning-based  approach to jointly optimize sensor and algorithm designs in  computational camera pipelines in order to automatically discov -er new imaging strategies (Bouman), and a Our latest project is  a data-driven approach to predicting the spread of COVID-19  in every U.S. county.theoretical investigation of how networks  of neurons form, store, and retrieve memories (Effros). Learning  tools are also used for more efficient uncertainty quantification in  ill-posed inverse problems, to improve our underlying model of a  physical system, and to incorporate more sophisticated knowl -edge into inference methods. MEMS and Micromachining  (Alireza Marandi, Mohammad  Mirhosseini, Axel Scherer, Yu-Chong Tai)  We exercise MEMS, Micro- and nanotechnologies to build var -Areas of Study and Research 157ious sensor and actuator devices. Current research projects  focus on bioMEMS and microimplant applications, including  integrated biochips, microfluidic chips, neuron chips, blood- count chips, neuroprobes, retinal implants and spinal cord  implants, wireless ECG, etc. Hands-on fabrication of these  devices is specially emphasized for every student in the labora-tory at Caltech.Networks and Wireless Communication  (Michelle Effros; Babak  Hassibi; Victoria Kostina; Adam Wierman, Computing &  Mathematical Sciences) Research in networks and wireless communication at Caltech  spans the spectrum from characterizing theoretical limits of  communication system performance to developing algorithms to approximate those limits in practice. Current areas of interest  include models and performance analysis for wireless networks,  code design and capacity characterization for communication environments characterized by unknown or time-varying channel  characteristics, novel modulation schemes, random access com-munications, remote control over wireless channels, and cloud  and edge computing and resource allocation for energy-efficient  computing.Optimization (Venkat Chandrasekaran, John Doyle, Andrei Faraon,  Babak Hassibi, Steven Low) Optimization is the science of choosing the best element from  a collection subject to some constraints.Current research at  Caltech spans the spectrum from theoretical foundations to  algorithmic development and eventual deployment in applica-tions. In the context of electrical engineering, optimization meth-ods play a prominent role in signal processing, communications  systems design, statistical modeling, control, and machine learn -ing. Quantum Information Science (Andrei Faraon, Alireza Faraon,  Marandi, Mohammad Mirhosseini) Experimental and theoretical research on physical implementa -tions of quantum information processing systems. Current areas  of research include: quantum computing hardware (memory,  logic, interconnects) based on integrated superconducting cir -cuits, photonics, and acoustics components; architectures for  scaling quantum networks and modular quantum computing based on quantum transducers; understanding the sources of  quantum decoherence in solid-state qubits. Signal Processing  (Katie Bouman, Venkat Chandrasekaran, Michelle  Effros, Babak Hassibi, Pietro Perona, P.P. Vaidyanathan)  Theoretical and computer-oriented work on a wide variety of  problems in digital signal processing, with strong links to opti -mization, statistics, inverse problems and other areas of applied  mathematics. Research areas include sparse sensor arrays,  sparse signal reconstruction, compressive sensing, phase  retrieval, structured signal recovery, high dimensional statistics,  array signal processing, multirate digital filters and filter banks,  radar signal processing, genomic signal processing, spectrum  Electrical Engineering158sensing, graph signal processing, asynchronous random access  communication systems, and lossless source coding and chan -nel coding. Other topics include novel machine learning algo -rithms with applications in computer vision, visual recognition  and categorization, and computational imaging with systems that tightly integrate algorithm and sensor design to find hidden signals for scientific discovery and technological innovation.Vision  (Katie Bouman; Michelle Effros; Pietro Perona; P.P.  Vaidyanathan; Richard Andersen, Computation & Neural  Systems; John Allman, Computation & Neural Systems)  Theory and applications of computer vision. Psychophysics and modeling of the human visual system. Modeling of vision-based decision-making in humans and animals. Current emphasis is  on visual object recognition; vision-based human-machine inter -faces; perception and modeling of human and animal behavior.  Areas of collaboration include statistical machine learning,  artificial intelligence, neural networks, computer graphics, neuro -physiology, psychology, applied probability, robotics, geometry,  and signal processing. ENERGY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY The useful transformation of energy from one form to another drives the  engine of civilization. Access to plentiful, inexpensive, and environmen -tally benign resources would free nations to pursue their greatest human  and economic potential. In the modern era, the appetite for energy is  convoluted, with a recognition of diminishing fossil fuel resources and  of dramatic negative impacts on global climate. The interdisciplinary  program in Energy Science and Technology (EST) aims to foster revolu -tionary methods of harnessing carbon-free energy sources while advanc -ing related technologies in carbon sequestration and further drawing  connections to policy and economic considerations. The program brings  together traditional topics in thermodynamics and kinetics with modern  topics in biomolecular engineering, charge and mass transport, and pho -toelectrochemistry. Faculty and students in the EST program are drawn  from a broad range of academic options, including materials science,  chemistry, applied physics, chemical engineering, mechanical engineer -ing, and environmental science and engineering. Areas of emphasis  reflect this breadth of disciplines and include photovoltaics, photoelec -trochemical cells, bio-fuels, fuel cells, batteries, thermoelectrics, hydro -gen generation and storage, and nuclear energy. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE  AND ENGINEERINGResearch and teaching in the ESE program span the large scales of  global climate variations, the local scales of urban air pollution, and the microscales of microbial ecosystems. Reflecting the interdisci -plinary nature of the ESE program, it unites scientists and engineers  Areas of Study and Research 159from Caltech™s Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, Division  of Engineering and Applied Science, and Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. Jointly they address, for example, how climate  has varied in the past and how it may change in the future, how bio -geochemical cycles and chemical reactions control the composition of  the atmosphere and local air quality as well as the Earth™s global energy  balance, and how more efficient and effective ways of producing bio -fuels or remediating toxic waste can be found. The methods employed  in research projects include laboratory studies of fundamental chemical  and biological processes; field studies of microbial ecology and of  atmospheric chemistry; and computational and theoretical studies of  chemical and physical processes on molecular to global scales.  Students enter the ESE program with diverse backgrounds, from  the basic sciences of physics, chemistry, and biology to applied sci -ence and engineering fields. The curriculum emphasizes interdisciplin -ary knowledge and is broad, yet it is flexible so that different back -grounds and focus areas can be accommodated. Areas of Research  Ł Atmospheric Chemistry and Air Pollution. Atmospheric chem-istry affects the composition of the atmosphere, properties  of clouds, and local air quality. Research areas include cloud  chemistry, aerosol chemistry and physics, trace gas photochem -istry, and emission sources and transport and reaction pathways  of organic species. The methods employed include laboratory  studies of aerosol formation and of chemical reactions in the  atmosphere; field campaigns with aircraft operated by ESE fac -ulty; satellite missions carried out in collaboration with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and theoretical and modeling studies of  tropospheric chemistry and the carbon cycle. Ł Environmental Chemistry and Technology.  Environmental  chemistry and technology research in ESE addresses funda -mental questions in heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry (e.g.,  chemistry of clouds, fogs, and haze aerosols), in aquatic chem -istry, in oxidation and reduction chemistry and technology, in  semiconductor photocatalysis, and in hydrogen production from  sunlight via electrochemical water splitting.  Ł Dynamics of Climate. Climate dynamics research in ESE address -es fundamental questions about how Earth™s climatic features are  maintained, how they have varied in the past, and how they may  change in the future. Research includes the large-scale dynamics  of the atmosphere and oceans, the hydrologic cycle and how it  responds to climate changes, monsoon dynamics, and the dynam -ics of the Southern Ocean, and climates of other planets. Methods  employed include theoretical and modeling studies, analyses of  observational data, and field campaigns to collect oceanographic  data.Ł Biogeochemistry and Climates of the Past. Biogeochemical research in ESE finds application at scales ranging from microbi -al ecosystems to the global carbon cycle. Current research inter -ests include the marine carbon cycle and its geochemical record  Environmental Science and Engineering 160in organic matter and carbonate minerals; microbial recycling of  nutrients and carbon; and development and use of geochemical proxies for understanding the ancient environment, including its  climate.Ł Environmental Microbiology.  Microorganisms are the primary  drivers of global biogeochemical cycles and represent the most  abundant and diverse forms of life on Earth. They catalyze critical biological transformation processes such as nitrogen  fixation, oceanic primary productivity, and methane cycling.  Microbial ecosystem research within ESE is focused on under -standing microbial processes in terrestrial, marine, and extreme  ecosystems. Research areas span a range of topics and field  sites, including the study of lignocellulose degradation by termite  gut microbiota, anaerobic cycling of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur  in microbial mats and sediments, and methane cycling in the  ocean. Physical Facilities ESE laboratories and facilities are housed in the Linde + Robinson  Laboratory for Global Environmental Science and in other nearby  buildings of Caltech™s Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences.  The laboratories are equipped with a wide variety of state-of-the-art  instruments.Ł The Environmental Analysis Center (EAC) houses analytical  instrumentation, for research that ranges from analyzing pol -lutants in groundwater to dating fossils. Its equipment includes  instruments for electrochemistry, plasma emission mass spec -trophotometry, gas chromatography, high-performance liquid  chromatography, fluorescence spectroscopy, infrared spec -trometry, gas chromatographyŒmass spectrometry, total organ -ic carbon analysis, and electrophoresis and electrical particle  size analysis. Scientists from across the Institute use the EAC  for cutting-edge analytical studies.  Ł The Atmospheric Chemistry and Aerosol Laboratory is  designed for studies of the photochemical reactions of gas -eous and particulate pollutants. In two reaction chambers (28  m3 each)Šthe first of their kind when they were builtŠthe  chemical reactions that produce urban smog and atmospheric  particles are investigated under precisely controllable condi -tions. They have revealed how the particles that make up smog  form in the atmosphere. Research results obtained with them  have been instrumental in designing effective air quality poli -cies. They continue to be invaluable in studies of air pollution.Ł The High-Precision Spectroscopy Laboratory is housed in  a quiet roomŠa room with specially designed acoustic and  electromagnetic insulation. Acoustic foam blocks sound waves  and copper cladding around the entire room blocks electro -magnetic waves. The noise-free environment allows us to  achieve exquisite precision in laser measurements of radiative  properties of greenhouse gases, aerosols, and atmospheric  trace constituents: the properties of single molecules can be  Areas of Study and Research 161measured. The measurements are the basis for climate models  and for planning satellite missions to measure the composition  of the atmosphere from space. Ł In the Laboratory for Atmospheric Chemical Physics, the  interactions of light with molecules in the atmosphere are  investigated to elucidate how pollution forms and to measure  the atmospheric concentration of aerosols and greenhouse  gases. Techniques are developed for the global monitoring of  the atmosphere from mobile ground-based laboratories and  from space-based instruments. Ł In the Environmental Chemistry and Technology Laboratory,  collimated sunlight from the Linde + Robinson solar telescope  is focused into photolysis reactors, where artificial photosyn -thesis processes are developed to convert water and carbon  dioxide into energetic fuels. Additionally, the chemical nature  of the air-water interface is studied, and new technologies are  developed for storing electric energy in novel lithium-air bat -teries and for treating water, for example, by photovoltaically  powered electrolysis or ultrasonically induced cavitation. Ł The Geochemistry Clean Room is designed for trace metal  analysis in an entirely metal-free environment. It has air  cleansed of almost all particles, to be able to measure with  high precision tiny traces of metals and radioactive isotopes  found in ocean water and embedded in corals and in stalag-mites. These measurements reveal information about how  climate has varied in Earth™s past and how carbon cycles  between the biosphere, the atmosphere, and the oceans. The  Clean Room is supported by a plasma mass spectrometry  instrument room that contains two multi-collector instruments  and a quadrapole instrument. The facility also contains a wet  chemistry laboratory for the processing and analysis of envi -ronmental samples. Ł The Biogeochemistry Laboratories provide capabilities for  analyzing the structure, abundance, and isotopic composition  of organic materials in environmental samples, ranging from  organisms to sediments to rocks. Instrumentation includes gas  chromatographŒmass spectrometers, isotope-ratio mass spec -trometers with capabilities for bulk and compound-specific  analysis, a spectroscopic water isotope analyzer, and a com -bustion elemental analyzer.  Ł In the Environmental Microbiology Laboratories, the diversi-ty and metabolic activities of microorganisms from terrestrial  and marine ecosystems are characterized through cultivation,  microscopic imaging, metagenomics, and molecular and iso -topic analysis. Instrumentation includes anaerobic chambers,  platforms for performing microfluidics-based analyses of the  nucleic acid contents of environmental single cells, capillary  sequencers, quantitative PCR, epifluorescence microscopes,  and CAMECA secondary ion mass spectrometers (7f Geo and  nanoSIMS 50L) available through the Center for Microanalysis.  Ł Fram High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster.  Fram is  Environmental Science and Engineering 162a (HPC) Cluster composed of 314 HP SL390 computer nodes  with 12 cores available per node. The cluster is connected  with a low latency, high bandwidth network called InfiniBand.  In addition to the traditional computer nodes, it also has 60  GPU based nodes with a total of 180 Nvidia M2090 GPUs. This  filesystem can perform at around 9.5 GB/s. Fram is the latest  of many clusters used for analysis and simulation of climate  dynamics.  Additionally, Caltech collaborates with the Naval Postgraduate  School™s Center for Interdisciplinary Remotely Piloted Aircraft Studies  (Monterey, California) . This center operates research aircraft for atmo -sphere science studies, including a Twin Otter aircraft that carries  state-of-the-art instruments to measure atmospheric aerosol and  cloud properties in situ. Faculty, students, and staff in the ESE pro -gram also have access to the supercomputer facility of the Division  of Geological and Planetary Sciences, where they carry out simula -tions of dynamical processes in the atmosphere and oceans and of  chemical reactions and transport processes affecting atmospheric  chemistry. GEOLOGICAL AND PLANETARY SCIENCES Students and faculty in the Division of Geological and Planetary  Sciences study Earth and the planets to understand their origin, con-stitution, and development, and the effect of the resulting physical  and chemical environments on the history of life and on humanity.  The approach to these problems relies strongly on the basic sciences.  Programs of study and research are pursued in environmental science  and engineering, geobiology, geochemistry, geology, geophysics, and  planetary science. The curriculum is flexible so that students with  degrees in biology, chemistry, engineering, or physics may carry out  graduate work within the division, and interdisciplinary studies are  encouraged.Southern California provides an excellent natural laboratory for the  study of geology, tectonics, and earthquakes. Current advances in  understanding the dynamic motions of Earth™s interior have opened  new opportunities for the study of crustal motions and earthquakes.  Historic records of seismic activity are put into long- term perspective  by studies of surface and bedrock geology. The dynamics and geom -etry of crustal movements are studied on local, regional, and global  scales in order to understand the evolution of continents, subduction  zones, and mid-ocean ridges. The division maintains active field pro -grams in diverse areas in North America and throughout the world.  The events that shaped Earth can be identified by studying the  structure of rocks and their chemical and isotopic compositions.  The absolute chronology of Earth and solar system history can be  established by measurements of radioactive isotopes. These geo -logical events have been intimately associated with the origin and  evolution of life on Earth. The field of geobiology uses both geological  Areas of Study and Research 163and genetic evidence to examine the impact of life on Earth and the  impact of geological conditions on biology. The field of geochem -istry includes studies of radiogenic and stable isotopes, petrology,  chemical oceanography, and atmospheric chemistry. These tools are  applied to the origins of igneous and metamorphic rocks, evidence of  past climate change, tracing anthropogenic influences on Earth, and  the structure of planetary interiors. The comparative study of the other  planetsŠtheir atmospheres, surfaces, and internal structuresŠis  important in our understanding of Earth and its place in the cosmos.  The early history of the solar system can be approached by studies of  extraterrestrial materials, including lunar samples, interplanetary dust  grains, and meteorites.Physical FacilitiesThe division is housed in four adjacent buildings, which are well  equipped for modern instruction and laboratory work. They contain  several seminar rooms and a library as well as student and faculty  offices. Numerous computers are distributed throughout the division,  including a facility for geographic information systems and remote  sensing. Rock and mineral collections and sample preparation  areas are available. There are modern laboratories equipped with a  scanning electron microscope and electron microprobe; a variety of  plasma-source, gas-source, thermal emission, and secondary ion  mass spectrometers; optical-, infrared-, and Raman spectrometers;  high-temperature furnaces and high-pressure apparatus including  piston-cylinder, multi-anvil, diamond anvil, and shock-wave facilities.  Cooperation with other departments on campus provides access to  additional instrumentation for sample preparation and analysis. Laboratories for molecular geobiology provide capabilities for  culturing, manipulating, and studying a wide range of environmental  microbes, including anaerobes. A sensitive magnetometer facility is  designed for the study of both biomagnetism and paleomagnetics.  The Seismological Laboratory, housed in the GPS division, oper -ates the Southern California Seismic Network jointly with the U.S.  Geological Survey. The network records and analyzes real-time  earthquake data from more than 380 seismic stations located across  Southern California. Data from the network are available for research  via the Southern California Earthquake Data Center. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA™s lead center for planetary  exploration, is located seven miles from campus and is administered  by the Institute. Students and faculty participate in JPL activities  through joint research, instrument development, mission operations,  and data analysis. In addition, Caltech owns and operates several  optical and radio observatories that are used partly for planetary  research. Active programs of planetary studies are pursued at the  Owens Valley Radio Observatory, Palomar Mountain, and the Keck  Telescopes and, in the near future, the Thirty-Meter Telescope project. Geological and Planetary Sciences164HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE The program in history and philosophy of science is devoted to the  study of the historical evolution and philosophical underpinnings of  the physical and biological sciences. Work in history and philosophy  of science may be pursued as an undergraduate option, a graduate  minor, or on a course-by-course basis. Historical research in the  program includes the origins of experimental practice, the social  and institutional contexts of science, the origins and applications of  quantitative methods, specific developments since antiquity in phys-ics, biology, and chemistry, as well as biographical and comparative  studies. Philosophical research in the program deals with issues in  causation, explanation, scientific inference, the foundations of proba -bility and decision theory, philosophy of mind, psychology and neuro -science, and scientific fraud and misconduct.HUMANITIESEnglish at Caltech spans the major periods of American and British writing. Students can pursue interests ranging from Shakespeare and  a survey of drama to romantic and modern poetry; from early fiction to  the postmodern novel. History at Caltech examines the Western and non-Western past to  understand the evolution of culture, science, institutions, and behavior.  Courses span the medieval, Renaissance, and modern periods; the  United States, Europe, and Asia; and special topics such as radicalism  and demography. In certain courses, quantitative methods drawn from  the social sciences are applied to historical studies. Philosophy is concerned with the most fundamental issues involving  the nature of the world and of human knowledge, values, and judg -ment. At Caltech, particular emphasis is placed on philosophy of the natural and social sciences, scientific inference, and philosophy of  mind, psychology and neuroscience. In addition to survey courses we  offer courses on more focused topics, including causality, probability,  quantum mechanics, space-time, free will, consciousness, and on ethi -cal questions raised by modern science and technology. Visual culture at Caltech encompasses the study of art history, film,  media, and scientific images. Students work to gain visual literacy,  and to understand both the history of images humans may have been looking at for hundreds or even thousands of years, and the prove -nance, location, and nature of the images we see now in our every  day lives. Some visual culture classes make use of the resources of  the Huntington Library, Art Museum, and Botanical Gardens; the Los  Angeles County Museum of Art; and other museums in the area. Courses in English, history, philosophy, and visual culture are given  at both introductory and advanced levels. A variety of courses in music, writing, and in foreign languages, liter -ature, and culture are also available. Areas of Study and Research 165Areas of Research The English faculty, interested in new approaches to studying their sub -ject, engage in research into the relationships between literature and  the pictorial arts, literature, and history, and the material production  of literature. Research in history covers a wide range of historical fields and meth -odologies. Topics include an examination of the development of racial  attitudes and behavior in the 19th-century United States; the history of the  physical and biological sciences and of science in relationship to society;  history and film; and political and economic development in early modern  Europe. A number of faculty carry out research and teaching in the interre -lated subjects of science, ethics, and public policy. Research in philosophy includes work in philosophy of science and  philosophy of mind, with particular research foci in philosophy of phys -ics, causation, probability and decision theory, and the philosophy of  neuroscience and free will. Faculty research in visual culture focuses on a wide variety of time  periods, geographic locations, and media forms but has in common a  careful attention to the conditions under which objects are made, the  ways in which they circulate, and the reactions they inspire in audi -ences.INFORMATION AND DATA SCIENCES The information and data sciences are concerned with the acquisi -tion, storage, communication, processing, and analysis of data. These  intellectual activities have a long history, and Caltech has traditionally  occupied a position of strength with faculty spread out across applied  mathematics, electrical engineering, computer science, mathemat-ics, physics, astronomy, economics, and many others disciplines. In  the last decade, there has been a rapid increase in the rate at which  data are acquired, with the objective of extracting actionable knowl -edgeŠin the form of scientific models and predictions, business  decisions, and public policies. From a technological perspective, this  rapid increase in the availability of data creates numerous challenges  in acquisition, storage, and subsequent analysis. More fundamental -ly, humans cannot deal with such a volume of data directly, and it is  increasingly essential that we automate the pipeline of information  processing and analysis. All areas of human endeavor are affected:  science, medicine, engineering, manufacturing, logistics, the media,  entertainment. The range of scenarios that concern a scientist in this  domain are very broadŠfrom situations in which the available data  are nearly infinite (big data), to those in which the data are sparse and  precious; from situations in which computation is, for all practical pur -poses, an infinite resource to those in which it is critical to respond  rapidly and computation must thus be treated as a precious resource;  from situations in which the data are all available at once to those in  which they are presented as a stream. As such, the information and data sciences now draw not just upon traditional areas spanning computer science, applied mathematics, and  Information and Data Sciences166electrical engineeringŠsignal processing, information and communica -tion theory, control and decision theory, probability and statistics, algo -rithmsŠbut also a range of new contemporary topics such as machine learning, network science, distributed systems, and neuroscience. The  result is an area that is new, fundamentally different from related areas  like computer science and statistics, and that is crucial to modern  applications in the physical sciences, social sciences, and engineering.  The Information and Data Sciences (IDS) option is unabashedly mathematical, focusing on the foundations of the information and data sciences, across its roots in probability, statistics, linear algebra, and  signal processing. These fields all contribute crucial components of  data science today. Further, it takes advantage of the interdisciplinary  nature of Caltech by including a required set of application courses  where students will learn about how data touches science and engi -neering broadly. The flexibility provided by this sequence allows stu -dents to see data science in action in biology, economics, chemistry,  and beyond.  In addition to a major, the IDS option offers a minor that focuses on  the mathematical foundations of the information and data sciences but recognizes the fact that many students in other majors across campus  have a need to supplement their options with practical training in data science.INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY Information science and technology (IST) is a multidivisional research  area that includes participants from the biology, chemistry and chemi -cal engineering, engineering and applied science, humanities and social sciences, and physics, mathematics and astronomy divisions. Areas of  emphasis include networking and distributed systems, neuromorphic  engineering and sensory-based machines, quantum computation and communications, molecular electronics and biochemical computing,  biological circuit design, information flow in economic and social systems,  and mathematical foundations of information. Physical FacilitiesIST is mainly centered around the Annenberg Center for Information  Science and Technology and the Moore Laboratory. Research  centers associated with IST include the Lee Center for Advanced Networking, the Center for Neuromorphic Systems Engineering, the  Center for Biological Circuit Design, the Center for the Mathematics of  Information, the Center for the Physics of Information, and the Social and Information Science Laboratory. INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES PROGRAM Interdisciplinary studies offer an educational alternative for undergrad -uates whose goals cannot be satisfied with a normal undergraduate  option. The student gathers a two-person faculty committee, represent -ing at least two divisions of the Institute, and chooses their own scho-Areas of Study and Research 167lastic requirements under this committee™s supervision. Approval must  also be obtained from the Curriculum Committee, a standing commit -tee of the faculty. The interdisciplinary studies program has no facilities  of its own. Areas of study and research may be selected from any part  of the Institute. (For a complete description, see page 310.)MATERIALS SCIENCE Materials scientists study relationships between the properties of materi -als and their internal structure, and how this structure can be controlled.  Our multidisciplinary faculty, students, and postdoctoral scholars create  new materials and take rigorous approaches to understand and control  the properties of materials and their internal structure. From batteries and  solar cells, to electronic devices and micro- and nano-, our department is  at the forefront of scientific discovery and new technologies.  Areas of Research The current areas of research by the materials science faculty include a  broad range of materials, some far removed from their equilibrium ther -modynamic states. Examples of such materials include metallic glasses,  thin films, two-dimensional solids, quantum materials, porous and archi -tected solids, energy-storage materials, nanostructured materials, and  materials for photovoltaics and electronic devices. The physical charac -teristics of interest span a wide range of mechanical, thermodynamic,  electrical, magnetic and electrochemical properties.  Physical FacilitiesResearch by the faculty, graduate students, and advanced undergrad -uates is conducted in the W. M. Keck Laboratory, the Harry G. Steele  Laboratory, and frequently in the Kavli Nanoscience Institute (KNI)  Laboratory, a core cleanroom facility dedicated to nanofabrication and  characterization. The KNI Lab and its technical staff provide training  and access to advanced instrumentation that support the nano- and microfabrication process from beginning to end. This includes resourc -es for electron and ion beam lithography; optical lithography; thin-film  and chemical vapor deposition; metal and oxide evaporation; dry etch-ing; various processing techniques; metrology including a spectroscop -ic ellipsometer; a suite of microscopes, such as focused ion beams  (FIB), scanning electron microscopes (SEM) with energy dispersive  spectroscopy, and AFM. The KNI also manages a transmission elec -tron microscopy (TEM) facility which houses a 300-keV scanning TEM  instrument with high resolution and analytical capabilities. Additional facilities for the characterization of materials include X-ray powder diffractometers with position-sensitive detectors. Material- preparation facilities include equipment for additive manufacturing,  physical vapor deposition under ultra-high vacuum conditions, arc  melting, induction melting, casting, rapid solidification, processing of  ceramic powders, and high-energy ball milling. More specialized instru -ments include impedance spectrometers for transport and dielectric  measurements, Mössbauer spectrometers, differential scanning calo -Materials Science168rimeters and differential thermal analyzers, thermogravimetric analyzers,  and gas adsorption analyzers. In addition to the general-use equipment within materials science, a wide range of mechanical and microstructural characterization facil -ities are available elsewhere at Caltech including a scanning electron  microscope with electron backscatter detectors, mechanical testing  machines, nanoindenters, an in-situ mechanical deformation instru-ment, AFM, electrochemical instrumentation, and an electrical probe  tester. MATHEMATICS Areas of Research Students in mathematics have the opportunity to work in many fields of current research. The main active areas of research by the faculty  include the following: Ł Algebra. Finite group theory, algebraic groups, representation  theory, symmetric functions, algebraic K-theory.  Ł Algebraic Geometry.  Moduli spaces, birational geometry, Hodge  theory, Calabi-Yau varieties, arithmetic geometry. Ł Analysis. Classical real and complex analysis, harmonic analy -sis, functional analysis and operator theory, orthogonal polynomials;  complex, smooth, and random dynamical and Hamiltonian systems,  fractals, integrable systems, partial differential equations.  Ł Combinatorics. Combinatorial designs and matrix theory, cod -ing theory, extremal set theory. Ł Geometry and Topology.  Low-dimensional topology, hyperbolic  geometry, geometric group theory and foliations; symplectic  geometry and topology, topological gauge theory, knot theory,  and their interface with theoretical physics. Ł Mathematical Logic. Set theory and its interactions with analy-sis, combinatorics, dynamical systems, and model theory.  Ł Mathematical Physics. Schrödinger operators, random matrices.Ł Noncommutative Geometry. Ł Number Theory.  Algebraic number theory, automorphic forms,  Shimura varieties, Galois representations, and L-functions. Physical FacilitiesThe mathematics department is housed in the Ronald and Maxine Linde Hall of Mathematics and Physics and the W.K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory. In addition to offices for the faculty and graduate students, there are classrooms, conference rooms, discussion areas, a lecture hall, and a lounge for informal gatherings of the students and staff. The mathematics collection is housed nearby in the Sherman Fairchild Library.Areas of Study and Research 169MECHANICAL ENGINEERINGMechanical engineering at Caltech explores the boundaries between  traditional disciplines of science and engineering in order to develop a  fundamental understanding of interdisciplinary challenges and create  advanced technology to address contemporary problems. Mechanical  engineering encompasses three broad areas: (1) mechanics of materials,  (2) systems and control, and (3) thermal sciences and fluid dynamics. The educational program in mechanical engineering prepares students  for research and professional practice in an era of rapidly advancing tech -nology. It combines a strong background in the basic and engineering sci -ences with anemphasis on addressing the critical technological challenges  of the day. It strives to develop professional independence, creativity, lead -ership, and the capacity for continuing professional and intellectual growth. Areas of Research Ł Mechanics of Materials. Studies in the field of mechanics of materials emphasize a fundamental understanding of mechan-ical behavior and failure of materials as well as its applications.  Areas of interest include static and dynamic deformation and  failure of homogeneous and heterogeneous solids, mechanical  behavior of nanostructures, active materials, microstructure  characterization and evolution, thin films, micro-electro-mechan -ical systems (MEMS), composites, fracture and frictional sliding  of solids, earthquake source processes, seismo-mechanics,  geomechanics, and granular media. Most problems emphasize  bridging temporal and spatial scales and the development of advanced analytical, computational, or experimental techniques.Ł Systems and Control. This area combines a broad range  of mechanical engineering fields, including control systems,  dynamics, kinematics, and mechanical design, as well as cross-disciplinary areas such as signal processing, computer  control, engineering computation, electromechanical design,  micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) design, and bioengi -neering. General areas of interest include control theory, estima -tion theory, decision theory, and robotics. Ł Thermal Sciences and Fluid Dynamics. This area encompasses  experimental and computational research in fluid dynamics, heat  and mass transfer, thermodynamics, and combustion. Specific  research areas include Stokesian dynamics, granular materials,  cavitation and multiphase flow, turbulent combustion, explosion  dynamics, and flow-generated sound. Applications cover a range of scales from molecular to high Reynolds number flows.  They include constitutive modeling of colloidal dispersions, micro/nanofluidic systems including Marangoni and thermocap -illary forcing in thin liquid films, the formation of pollutants from  combustion hydrocarbon fuels, instabilities of complex, reacting  flows, and high-speed flows with shock waves. Inter-disciplinary  activities in the group include research on geophysical phenom -ena, biomedical devices, bio-inspired propulsion, and application  of control theory to fluid mechanics. Mechanical Engineering170Physical FacilitiesStudents and faculty in mechanical engineering conduct research in lab -oratory facilities in a number of areas, including design and prototyping,  flow visualization, heat transfer, robotics, bio/nano-mechanics, nano-me -chanical testing, seismo-mechanics, biomolecular circuits, autonomous  vehicles, explosion dynamics, T5 hypervelocity flow, and geomechanics.  A number of High Performance Computing (HPC) clusters are available,  including both CPU- and GPU-based architectures. Kavli Nanoscience  Institute (KNI) is utilized for micro- and nano-fabrication, testing, and  characterization.MEDICAL ENGINEERINGThe Andrew and Peggy Cherng Department of Medical Engineering at  Caltech focuses on the applications of micro-/nanoscale engineering  sciences and technologies to the design, analysis, and implementation of diagnostic, therapeutic, and monitoring devices for translational medicine. Areas of Research  Ł Affordable Medical Devices and Technologies  (Gao, Gharib, Hajimiri, Ismagilov, Pickar, Yang)  Chairs for children with  cerebral palsy, bed-sore mitigation, toxic material filters, sali -va-based diabetes tests, handheld diagnostic devices, and remote medical tracking systems. Devices that provide freedom  from disability.   Biomaterials (Gradinaru, Grubbs, Greer, Ismagilov, Shapiro, Tai)   Biocompatible medical materials, nanoscale-engineered smart  materials, device-tissue interface, and cell-material interactions. Ł Biomechanics & Bio-Inspired Design (Burdick, Colonius, Gao,  Gharib, Gradinaru, Shapiro)  Bio-inspired self-propulsion tech -nologies, control systems, optimization techniques, shape mor -phing, cardiovascular mechanics, biomolecular nanomechanics,  and muscle and membrane mechanics. Ł Medical Diagnostic, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Implants (Emami, Gao, Scherer, Tai)   Microscale implants with new function -alities to interface intact tissues and/or to replace defective func -tions: retinal implants, spinal cord implants, ECG implants, cardio -vascular implants, implantable pressure sensors, glucose sensors,  drug delivery pumps, and implantable bio-analyte sensors.  Ł Medical Diagnostic and Monitoring On-Chip Devices (Emami, Hajimiri, Ismagilov, Scherer, Yang)  Magnetic spectroscopy, bio -assay, and drug-screening platforms, micro-PCR and sequencer,  and on-chip bio-sensors. Ł Medical Imaging and Sensing (Colonius, Emami, Faraon, Gao, Gharib, Gradinaru, Greer, Hajimiri, Scherer, Shapiro, Wang, Yang)   Medical photonics and sensors, advanced imaging technologies, micro flow-field imaging, computational image analysis, lensless  microscopy-on-a-chip, diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound,  and shock waves, single-molecule detection and diagnostics, Areas of Study and Research 171magnetic spectroscopy, tera-hertz imaging, Raman spectros -copy, photoacoustic tomography, thermoacoustic tomography,  optical time reversal (wavefront shaping/engineering), com -pressed ultrafast photography, holographic microscopy, non-in -vasive label-free biomedical imaging and magnetic resonance  imaging, wearable biosensors. Ł Medical Nanoelectronics (Emami, Gao, Hajimiri, Scherer)   Integrated nanoelectronics and circuits for medical applications,  extremely low power medical electronics and sensors, high  bandwidth wireless communication devices, self-healing circuits  and systems, on-chip tera-hertz sources, and systems-on-a-chip.  Ł Micro/Nano Medical Technologies and Devices  (Burdick,  Emami, Faraon, Gao, Gharib, Greer, Hajimiri, Ismagilov, Scherer,  Shapiro, Tai, Wang, Yang)  Biochips, bio-MEMS/NEMS, micro-/ nano-fabrication, holographic microscopy, and photoacoustic  microscopy for medical applications.  Ł Nano & Micro Fluidics (Gao, Gharib, Ismagilov)  Micro-/ nano-fluidics, drug delivery, and physiological machines.  Ł Prosthetics (Burdick, Emami, Tai)  Neural prosthetics and direct  brain-machine interfaces, human prosthetics for paralysis, pure- thought-based control of external electromechanical devices,  computer-decoding algorithms for direct brain interface, and  robotic fingers. Ł Wireless Medical Technologies  (Emami, Hajimiri, Gharib, Scherer, Shapiro, Tai)  Wireless communications through skins  and tissues for medical electronic implants, electrograms, wire -less power transfer, and biotic/abiotic interfaces. MICROBIOLOGYMicrobiology recognizes that microbial inventions have profoundly  shaped every aspect of the biosphere and geosphere throughout  Earth™s history. Many important molecular and cellular processes in  eukaryotes are now known to have first arisen in bacteria and archaea,  and microbial metabolic activities control numerous geochemical  cycles. Microorganisms have served and will continue to serve as  model systems in many areas of science, ranging from basic biology  and biochemistry, to the understanding of physical principles governing  biological systems, to emerging questions of robustness, stability, and  design in complex networks. Interactions among microbes within com -munities, as well as interactions between microbial communities and  their environments, are poorly understood. Yet studying these interac -tions is key to understanding fundamental relationships in nature, such  as: 1.) the feedback loops connecting microbial activities in aquatic  or terrestrial habitats with changes in composition of the atmosphere,  hydrosphere and geosphere, and 2.) the symbiotic associations that  sustain diverse forms of life today. For example, the interactions  between a mammalian host and its microbiota are essential to the  host™s normal functioning and development, not merely the cause of  infectious disease. Due to their metabolic versatility, microorganisms are  Microbiology 172likely to emerge as key engineering components for solving global soci -etal problems, ranging from human health, to energy, to providing clean  water to more than one billion people who currently live without it. Caltech™s version of microbiology is unique. Diverse faculty from four  divisions (BBE, CCE, GPS, EAS) work together to train students in how  to understand microbial systems at various spatial and temporal scales:  from the molecular to the global, from the present to the past. This  interdisciplinary training involves study of molecular and cellular biology,  physiology, chemistry, ecology, and quantitative reasoning. NEUROBIOLOGYUnderstanding the brain remains one of the great intellectual chal -lenges for science. To grasp the function of this marvelous organ, one  needs to investigate structures, mechanisms, and dynamics that span  across many spatial and temporal scales. For example, when we hear  a sound, our brain is sensitive to time delays of just a few microsec -onds, yet the memory of that sound can last a lifetimeŠ11 orders of  magnitude longer. The span is similar in the spatial domain. The sheer  number of nerve cells in the brain, approximately 1,011, suggests a  coarse-grained treatment that glosses over the details of the individual  neurons, yet a single nerve cell and even a single molecule can play a  decisive role. For example, activation of a single light receptor in our  eye leads to a visual percept that can ultimately direct our behavior. Neurobiology at Caltech does, indeed, span this range. Our laboratories  work on the molecular structure and function of channels and recep -tors; the integration of such molecules into signaling organelles like the  synapse; the structure and function of single neurons; the integration of  neurons of diverse types into circuits; and the collective function of these  circuits in controlling behavior, perception, memory, action, cognition, and  emotion. Another area of emphasis concerns the developmental mech -anisms by which these structures form: the differentiation of neurons in  early life, the genetic mechanisms that guide their synaptic wiring plan,  and how subsequent experience modifies these connections. There is also  increasing interest in leveraging the basic neurobiological insights to an  understanding of brain disorders. Finally, Caltech™s traditional strength in  engineering stimulates the development of new methods for brain science:  from optical techniques to new twists of genetic engineering, to novel  multi-electrode devices, to computational models and theories.  To further explore the range of brain research at CaltechŠand enjoy  some colorful picturesŠplease visit the neurobiology option website. PHYSICSAreas of Research Students in physics will find opportunities for research in a number of  areas where members of the faculty are currently active, including those  listed below. Physics research at Caltech is often done in collabora -tion with scientists in the departments of applied physics, astrophysics,  Areas of Study and Research 173planetary science, engineering, chemistry, biology, and other depart -ments, as well as with collaborators at other universities and labora -tories. Additional research programs and more detailed information can  be found on the Caltech physics department website.Ł Experimental Elementary Particle Physics. Activities in ele-mentary particle physics are aimed primarily at discovering new  particles and interactions physics beyond the Standard Model  (BSM) complemented by precision measurements of SM pro -cesses. Experimental efforts employ hadronic colliders and elec -tron, muon, and neutrino beams at several international facilities.  Current experiments include: ~   CMS searching for dark matter and other new particles and  new symmetries up to the mass scale of several TeV at the  Large Hadron Collider at CERN ~  the NOvA and DUNE long baseline experiments at Fermilab, studying the pattern of masses, mixing and CP violation in  the neutrino sector~  the Mu2e experiment, searching for physics beyond thE  standard model in charged lepton flavor violation  ~  a nascent effort to search for accelerator production of dark  matter called LDMX~  the long-running SuperCDMS effort to directly detect scatter -ing of galactic dark matter with normal matter. Ł Theoretical Elementary Particle Physics. The particle theory group studies the unification of interactions based on string the -ory, the detailed properties of hadrons described by QCD, the  quantum properties of black holes, the foundations of cosmolo -gy, including dark matter and dark energy, and other aspects of  mathematical physics. Ł Condensed-Matter Physics. Areas of interest include correlat -ed electron systems, topological quantum systems, phase  transitions, atomic and excitonic Bose condensation, nano-mechanical and nanoelectronic systems, biosensors, quantum  electromechanics, phonon physics, high-temperature super -conductivity, graphene and carbon nanotube systems, quantum  entanglement, dynamics of disordered systems, chaos, pattern  formation, and systems far from equilibrium. Resources include  numerous labs in the Caltech physics department, at the Kavli  Nanoscience Institute at Caltech, and at the Jet Propulsion  Laboratory. Ł Quantum Optics and Information. Research on campus and at  the Institute for Quantum Information at Caltech includes studies of the nature of quantum computation and quantum information,  cavity quantum electrodynamics, algorithms and error correction  techniques in quantum computation, and generally how quan-tum physics can be harnessed to improve the acquisition, trans -mission, and processing of information. Ł Experimental Atomic/Molecular/Optical Physics. Experimental atomic, molecular, and optical (AMO) research at Caltech focus -es on controlling and understanding complex quantum systems  for a wide variety of scientific goals. Current experiments include  Physics174building arrays of ultracold atoms to study quantum information, metrology, many-body physics, and simulation of condensed  matter systems; precision measurements in cold and ultracold  polar molecules to search for fundamental symmetry violations;  engineering atom-light interactions in photonic crystals; quan-tum physics of mechanical devices, hybrid superconducting  quantum circuits, and optomechanical sensors; neurophotonics  and neuromolecular sensing; development of quantum networks  and communication and addressing fundamental questions  in quantum information. Many of these research strands are  collaborative efforts supported by the Institute for Quantum  Information and Matter. Ł Nuclear Physics. The interests of the nuclear group focus on  performing precision measurements to search for new physics  beyond the Standard Model. In particular, precision measure -ments of free neutron decay allow sensitive searches for new  physics, while measurements of the neutron electric dipole  moment may help explain the dominance of matter over anti-matter in the universe.Ł Astrophysics. Research in this area covers a broad range of  topics using observational tools covering the entire electromag -netic spectrum. ~  The high-energy astrophysics group at the Space Radiation  Laboratory (SRL) uses X-ray and gamma-ray detectors aboard spacecraft and balloons to investigate energetic  processes from compact astrophysical objects, including  gamma-ray bursts from neutron-star and black-hole sys -tems, supernova and hypernova dynamics, and the devel -opment of stars and galaxies in the early universe. ~  The cosmic ray group at SRL uses data from a variety of  spacecraft to study the composition of energetic particles  arriving from the sun, the local interstellar medium, and  beyond, in order to understand the origin and acceleration  of energetic particles in space.  ~  The millimeter/submillimeter astronomy group, with collab -orators at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, studies the solar  system, star and planet formation, the interstellar medium, galaxies, galaxy clusters, and the epoch of reionization  using data from the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory  (CSO) and other facilities. Future-oriented programs include  the development of new superconducting detector technol -ogies and instruments for use at these wavelengths, also in collaboration with JPL, and an effort to move the currently  idle CSO to a new, more sensitive site. ~  The Galactic compact objects astrophysics group stud -ies black holes, neutron stars, and white dwarf systems,  including gravitational wave sources detectable by future  space missions such as LISA. The group uses telescopes  at Palomar, Kitt Peak and the Keck Observatory, as well as  the radio telescopes of the NASA Deep Space Network.Ł Theoretical Astrophysics. The TAPIR (Theoretical Astrophysics  Areas of Study and Research 175Including Relativity) group carries out research on an  ever-changing list of topics, including planets; stars, neutron  stars, black holes and their interactions; gravitational-wave astrophysics; cosmology; the formation of stars and galaxies;  and numerical and analytical general relativity. Ł Cosmology.  The observational cosmology group explores the  structure and dynamics of the early universe using precise  measurements of the cosmological microwave background radi -ation and large scale structures from detectors on the ground,  on balloons, and on spacecraft. Efforts to directly detect dark  matter are also under way. These experiments include an active  program of detector development in collaboration with scientists  at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Theoretical studies seek to  understand the large-scale structure of the universe, including  the physical nature of dark matter and dark energy. Ł Gravitational-wave Astronomy.  Observations from the LIGO  and LISA projects seek to use gravitational radiation to study a  variety of astrophysical sources. Theoretical studies are aimed at  developing sensitive data analysis techniques and calculating  gravitational-wave signals from sources such as coalescing  black holes and neutron stars. Physical FacilitiesThe physics and astrophysics departments and laboratories are mainly  housed in six buildings on campus: the Norman Bridge Laboratory,  the Alfred P. Sloan Laboratory of Mathematics and Physics, the W.  K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, the George W. Downs Laboratory of  Physics, the C. C. Lauritsen Laboratory of High Energy Physics, and  the Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics. Off-campus astro -nomical facilities include Palomar Observatory, the Keck Observatories,  Owens Valley Radio Observatory, the Caltech Submillimeter  Observatory (currently idle), and the Laser Interferometer Gravitational- wave Observatory (LIGO).SCIENTIFIC AND ENGINEERING  COMMUNICATION The Engineering and Applied Science (EAS) Division offers a program of  study in Scientific and Engineering Communication that prepares students  to engage with a variety of audiences and effectively communicate scien -tific topics. In order for engineering graduates to excel in their chosen field,  they need to develop oral, written, and media communication skills, and  an ability to work with a variety of stakeholders including industry lead-ers, policymakers, and academics. Courses in Scientific and Engineering  Communication (SEC) provide opportunities for students to experiment  with a variety of communication genres and in diverse environments. The  program is characterized by cross-disciplinary study and authentic practi -cal experiences in scientific communication and advocacy. Science and Engineering Communication176SOCIAL AND DECISION NEUROSCIENCE The Institute offers an interdisciplinary program of study in Social and  Decision Neuroscience that prepares students to conduct research on  the neurocomputational basis of decision-making and social interactions.  In order to carry out cutting-edge research in this area, students need  to acquire in-depth understanding of computational modeling, statistical  methods, systems neuroscience, neural measuring methods such as fMRI,  EEG or single unit recordings, as well as adequate understanding of relat -ed methods and results from the social sciences. The program is designed  for students seeking faculty jobs in neuroscience, psychology, marketing,  economics, political science or finance, or industry positions in the tech-nology, data science, and finance fields. Areas of Research This program is characterized by interdisciplinary research at the fron -tier of neuroscience, psychology, economics, and political science.  Examples of research topics of interest include the following:  Computational and neurobiological foundations of simple choice  in animals and humans.Computational and neurobiological basis of economic and polit -ical decision making.Neurocomputational basis of emotion and the impact on cogni -tion and behavior. Neurobiological basis of social behavior in human and animal  models.Neurobiological basis of moral judgment and decision-making. Applications of neuroscience to economics, finance, and politi -cal science.Physical FacilitiesResearch is conducted in multiple laboratories spanning a wide range  of experimental techniquesŠfrom behavioral experiments to single unit  neurophysiology. Researchers also have access to two state-of-the- art facilities: the Caltech Brain Imaging Center, which contains various  human and animal brain scanners, and the Social Science Experimental Laboratory, which contains state-of-the-art facilities for conducting  behavioral economic experiments of group and market interactions. SOCIAL SCIENCE PHILOSOPHY AND GOALS OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCE UNDERGRADUATE CORE The social science core curriculum initiates students in the study of how humans organize, decide, govern, and allocate their resources. It teaches students how to analyze and reason about individual behavior, markets, and other institutions. Our curriculum covers methods, as well as substance. The issues facing our students in the future will be different from those that are current, but the analytical principles and methodology needed to understand those problems will likely remain the same, albeit improved. Thus, the social science core curriculum Areas of Study and Research 177provides students with the knowledge and tools to, in the words of the catalog, ﬁnavigate the societal, political, and economic factors that influence, and are influenced by, their work.ﬂThe objectives of the social science core curriculum can be broken  into three broad categories of courses: introductory courses that teach  basic principles; methods courses that seek to transmit skills and ana-lytical tools; and courses exposing students to substantive ideas and problems in the social sciences. More concretely: ﬁFundamental ideas  and principlesﬂ classes expose students to a broad and introductory  overview of basic ideas in anthropology, economics, psychology, and  political science. ﬁMethodology and analysisﬂ courses focus mainly on giving students the theoretical and empirical tools to analyze problems.  They cover the theoretical modeling tools most commonly used in the  social sciences, as well as statistical and econometric techniques that are needed to analyze data. ﬁSubstantive problems in social science:  Individuals, institutions, and marketsﬂ courses expose students to an array of substantive questions in social science, from resource alloca -tion via markets and prices, the workings of political institutions, the consequences of poor governance, the psychological basis of human  behavior, and an understanding of financial markets.  SOCIAL SCIENCE GRADUATE PROGRAM  The Caltech Ph.D. program in Social Science is highly interdisciplinary,  integrating economics, political science, quantitative history, econo -metrics, and finance. It makes extensive use of mathematical model-ing, laboratory experiments, and econometric techniques. Research  in the social sciences program at Caltech strongly emphasizes the  under-standing and analysis of the relationships between individual  incentives, collective behavior, political and economic institutions, and  public policy.   Areas of Research  Ł Experimental Economics and Experimental Political Science. Caltech social scientists were among the early pioneers in the  field of laboratory experimentation and Caltech has maintained a strong leadership position and research presence in the field  ever since. Examples of the kinds of laboratory studies the fac-ulty are engaged in include the behavior and design of auctions  and market-like mechanisms, public goods provision and related  topics in public economics, the economics of networks and matching, decision theory, inter-personal bargaining, behavioral  economics, committee decision making, and electoral compe-tition. Many of our faculty engage in laboratory experimentation as part of their research agendas in economics and political sci -ence (Agranov, Camerer, Echenique, Nielsen, Palfrey, Plott, Saito,  Shum, Sprenger). Considerable laboratory experimentation also  focuses upon the workings of financial markets, and seeks to elucidate basic principles that underlie the pricing of assets, Social Science178trading, and information aggregation in these markets. Many  of these experiments are conducted through the use of net- worked computers (see Facilities) in the William D. Hacker Social Science Experimental Laboratory (SSEL) and the Laboratory for Experimental Economics and Political Science (LEEPS). The real  world provides another setting for experimental research outside  the laboratory, and Caltech social scientists have conducted  field experiments involving a wide variety of topics, ranging from decision making in organizations, social networks, and the  behavior of different cultural groups ranging from college stu -dents, to urban Americans to African villagers.   Ł Economic Theory and Game Theory.  Caltech has a strong  research group in economic theory, which, together with rigor -ous training in statistics and econometrics forms the backbone of the core curriculum for the PhD program. Theoretical research  at Caltech has played a key role in the design and practical  implementation of new institutions that more efficiently allocate  scarce resources and provide public goods. Some of this work  has had important public policy applications. Prominent exam -ples include the design of FCC auctions to allocate the elec-tromagnetic spectrum for telecommunication, and the market  for allocating and trading permits for pollution emissions in the Los Angeles basin. Much of this theoretical design research is  complemented by experimental studies that provide a testbed  for competing designs. There is an active group of faculty and  graduate students working in the areas of the optimal design  of contracts and markets (Cvitanic, Echenique, Plott), the economics of information (Pomatto, Tamuz), decision theory  (Echenique, Pomatto, Rangel, Saito), game theory (Echenique, Palfrey, Pomatto, Saito, Tamuz) and matching Social Science  and Research (Echenique). There are several active programs  for inter-action between our theory faculty in the social sciences  and the faculties of computer science and applied mathematics. This is formally organized around two interdisciplinary centers,  the Lee Center for Advanced Networking and the Social and Information Science Laboratory (SISL), with the latter offering a  bi-weekly seminar coordinated between the computer science  department and the social sciences faculty and featuring speak-ers in eco-nomics, computer science, game theory and related  disciplines. There are many informal connections that reinforce  the formal connections, including research collaborations  between faculty and graduate students in these different areas.   Ł Political Economy and Political Science. Caltech has a long tradition of strength in research that spans the boundary of the  economics and political science disciplines. Research in politi -cal economy at Caltech continues to be a major strength of the  program and provides a natural bridge that unites the faculty in  economics, political science, and quantitative history. The focus  of research in political economy and political science at Caltech  Areas of Study and Research 179emphasizes rigorous theoretical modeling drawing heavily upon  techniques from economic theory and game theory, combined  with empirical studies using highly sophisticated quantitative analyses of a wide variety of data sources: experimental, survey,  field, voting, and historical data. Ongoing political economy research areas of the current faculty include: the interacting  forces of bargaining, voting, and communication in commit-tees,  legislatures, bureaucracies, and assemblies (Agranov, Gibilisco,  Hirsch, Katz, Lopez-Moctezuma, Palfrey, Plott); the Voting  Technology Project, a joint Caltech-MIT research venture, estab -lished in 2000 to evaluate and improve the performance and  reliability of U.S. balloting technology, registration systems, elec -tion administration, redistricting, and election law (Alvarez, Katz);  political forces affecting judicial behavior (Hirsch, Shum), strate -gic voting in multicandidate and multi-stage elections (Alvarez,  Kiewiet, Palfrey, Plott), the politics of inequality and redistribution  (Agranov, Palfrey) and several areas of comparative and interna -tional politics, including studies of the causes and consequenc-es of corruption, domestic unrest, and international conflict  (Ensminger, Gibilisco, Lopez-Moctezuma).  Ł Financial Economics. Caltech has built a small but very active research group in finance. The researchers in this group are  working on a range of topics in mathematical finance (Cvitanic), empirical studies of venture capital and entrepreneurship  (Ewens), asset pricing (Cvitanic, Jin, Plott, Roll), dynamic con-tracting (Cvitanic), and behavioral finance (Camerer, Jin, Plott).  There is a regular seminar series in finance that features dis -tinguished researchers from around the world. Caltech faculty  outside the finance group itself are also engaged in empirical  research in financial economics. These include experimental  Areas of Study and Research studies of asset markets (Camerer,  Palfrey, Plott), interest rate policy making by the Federal Open  Market Committee (Lopez-Moctezuma), and online credit mar -kets (Xin). Ł Behavioral Economics. Research in behavioral economics at  Caltech overlaps all of the above groups. Laboratory experimental  research discovers interesting behavioral anomalies and can also  test theoretical models designed to account for such anomalies.  On the theoretical side, much of the game-theoretic and deci -sion-theoretic research at Caltech is motivated by experimental  observations, leading to extensions or modifications of standard  models. These extensions in turn suggest experimental designs  that are then implemented in the laboratory by our faculty and  graduate students. Faculty research in political behavior (Alvarez,  Katz, Kiewiet) and behavioral finance (Camerer, Jin, Plott) are  complementary and add strength more generally to under-stand -ing social behavior. We also have on our faculty a small but very  active group conducting research at the boundary of biology,  psychology, and the social sciences (Adolphs, Camerer, Mobbs,  Social Science180O™Doherty, Rangel). This group offers a separate PhD option  focused on the behavioral neuroscience of decision making  (see the catalog entry for ﬁSocial and Decision Neuroscienceﬂ).  Utilizing fMRI brain-imaging, eye-tracking, and other biological  measurement technologies, this group, often in collaboration with  other social science faculty and graduate students, has begun to  explore the neural foundations of decision making in individual  choice, game theoretic, and market settings.  Ł Quantitative History.  Just as with the theoretical, experimental,  and empirical work using contemporary, historical research con -ducted at Caltech employs mathematical modeling and sophis-ticated statistical techniques to attack a wide range of historical questions. Historical research conducted at Caltech addresses  questions that cut across economics, political science, politi -cal economy, and even finance, often combining archival work  with state-of-the art statistical techniques. These include the development of capital and credit markets in Europe (Hoffman,  Rosenthal), the evolution of wealth distribution from 1800 to the  present (Rosenthal), the causes of recurrent financial crises in  capitalist economies (Hoffman, Rosenthal), and the determinants  of economic and technological growth.  Ł Applied microeconomics and econometrics. Empirical research  in social science blends creative collection and analysis of  field data with rigorous application of tools and methods from  econometrics and statistics. We offer courses and supervise  students in these areas. A number of faculty members special -ize in empirical work in a number of fields, including finance (Ewens, Jin, Xin), industrial organization (Shum, Xin), political  economy (Alvarez, Gibilisco, Katz, Kiewiet, Lopez-Moctezuma,  Sherman, Shum), and behavioral economics (Camerer, Jin).  Methodological areas of specialization include econometrics  (Sherman, Shum, Xin), causal inference (Alvarez, Katz, Sherman,  Shum), machine learning (Alvarez, Katz, Xin), and Bayesian sta -tistics (Katz). Physical FacilitiesCaltech has two state-of-the-art onsite laboratories for experimental research in economics, political science, game theory, decision theory,  and financial economics: The Laboratory for Experimental Economics and Political Science (LEEPS, established 1987) and The Hacker Social Science Experimental Laboratory (SSEL, established 1998).Areas of Study and Research 181SYSTEMS BIOLOGYSystems Biology seeks to understand how the parts of biological sys-tems are integrated to produce the amazing machines, cells, organisms  and ecosystems that exist in our world. We seek to define general  principles of biological systems. Part of the effort involves defining  the relevant parts and measuring how they change in a quantitative  and comprehensive fashion as they carry out their functions. This task  is the domain of genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, functional  genomics, bioinformatics and other aspects of Network Biology and Bioinformatics. Another related task is to understand the ﬁmecha -nisms,ﬂ the precise structures and interactions of those parts that ulti -mately produce biological function. This task requires Computational  Modeling of potential mechanisms, coupled with Quantitative tests of the predictions of models by cell biological, molecular biological, and  biophysical techniques. One particularly stunning feature of organisms  is their ability to develop from a single fertilized egg; thus, Systems  Developmental Biology is an important third theme of our program. This  theme involves the study of how organisms generate complexity of cell  types in a defined spatial organization by a sequential, contingent, irre -versible cascade of molecular, cellular, and genomic processes. Our goal is to train students who can seamlessly integrate diverse quantitative and experimental methodology and can balance the tension between global understanding and mechanistic insight. This training involves study of biology, mathematics, quantitative reasoning,  computational and data analysis tools, and the rich experimental meth-ods of the biological sciences.Systems Biology182Section Three Information for UndergraduatesUndergraduate Information 183The undergraduate program leads to a four-year Bachelor of Science  degree. Admitted students matriculate in the fall term only. Caltech does  not have a summer session or part-time program and cannot consider you  if you already have a bachelor™s degree from another college, university,  or the equivalent. If you have matriculated at any college, university, or  the equivalent in a program leading to any degree, you will be required to  apply as a transfer student and should read the requirements in the sec -tion titled ﬁTransfer Admissions.™™ ADMISSION TO THE FRESHMAN CLASS Students are admitted to the freshman class on the basis of strong aca -demic performance in a rigorous course of college preparatory study,  especially in the areas of math and science; results of the SAT or ACT;  teacher and counselor evaluations; personal characteristics; a demon-strated interest in math, science, or engineering; and information provided  on the application. APPLYING Information on the application process can  be found on the admissions office website at www.admissions.caltech. edu. Students are encouraged to apply online through the Common  Application, the Coalition Application, or the QuestBridge program. For  further information on admission, please call (626) 395-6341 or e-mail  ugadmissions@caltech. edu. To be considered for admission, applications  to the freshman class must be submitted online by November 1 for Early  Action or January 3 for Regular Decision.   APPLYING  Information on the application process can be found on the admissions  office website at www.admissions.caltech.edu. Students are encouraged  to apply online through the Common Application, the Coalition Application,  or the QuestBridge program. For further information on admission, please  call (626) 395-6341 or e-mail ugadmissions@caltech.edu. To be consid -ered for admission, applications to the freshman class must be submitted  online by November 1 for Early Action or January 3 for Regular Decision.   EARLY ACTION The Early Action application process requires that the completed appli -cation be submitted online by November 1. Under this application plan,  students will be notified in mid-December of the admission decision.  Students admitted under Early Action have until May 1 to make their com-mitment to attend.   HIGH SCHOOL REQUIREMENTSStudents are expected to prepare for Caltech by successfully com-pleting the following curriculum:  Four years of mathematics (including calculus)  One year of physics  One year of chemistry  Three years of English (four years recommended)  One year of U.S. history/government (waived for international  students)Freshman Admission 184Standardized Exams  Applicants should note the following changes made to Caltech™s stan -dardized exams policies:  1.  Testing moratorium on both the requirement and consideration  of SAT and/or ACT test scores. This change, made in response  to the global COVID-19 pandemic and its continuing impact on access to these exams for students across the country and  globe, will be in effect for all first-year students applying to  Caltech for fall 2021, fall 2022, and fall 2023.2.  Elimination of the requirement for SAT Subject Tests: As of  January 2020, Caltech eliminated the requirement for applicants  to submit two SAT Subject Tests. These sections will not be  considered in the application review process. This change is  in effect for those students applying for the Caltech class that  begins in the fall of 2021.3.  Duolingo English Test is now also an accepted exam to demon -strate English language proficiency: As of June 2020, Caltech  added the Duolingo English Test as an accepted exam to  demonstrate a student's English language proficiency. Duolingo  English Test or TOEFL Internet Based Test (TOEFL IBT) scores  are required of all international citizens unless 1) your native  language is English, or 2) you have studied for two or more  years in a school where English is the language of instruction.  The latter must be completed prior to the application deadline.   EssaysThe essays, which are required as a part of the application, are intend -ed to provide students the opportunity to communicate their interests,  experiences, and background. Since Caltech is interested in learning  about each applicant, the essays are viewed as an important part of  the admission decision process.  EvaluationsTwo teacher evaluations and a Secondary School Report are required.  One evaluation must be from a math or science teacher, and one eval -uation from a humanities or social science teacher (see the instructions  in the application). A Secondary School Report must be filled out by the applicant™s high-school counselor or other school official. Additional Material Descriptions of research projects and hands-on science and engineer -ing experience are helpful, as is material that demonstrates experiences  outside math and science. Additional material should be identified with name and date of birth. Acceptance Caltech is a National Association for College Admissions Counseling member and therefore agrees to comply with the candidate™s reply date  of May 1. Places in the entering class will not be held after May 1. Early Action applicants will be informed of their status in mid-December, and  Regular Decision applicants will be informed by mid-March.  Undergraduate Information 185Deferral of Entrance For reasons of travel or work, Caltech will consider requests from  admitted students for a one-year deferral of entrance. Students who request a deferment must submit a written request stating the purpose  of postponement. Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate,  and College Credit Caltech encourages all prospective undergraduate applicants to pre -pare by challenging themselves with the most rigorous course of study  available, including the Advanced Placement (AP) and International  Baccalaureate (IB) programs. However, college credit for AP or IB  classes is not automatic. Course credit and/or placement in an accel -erated program is sometimes granted as deemed appropriate by the  department faculty. The awarding of Caltech course credit takes place  at the time of registration each fall.   Biology Biology majors who have passed Bi 8 and Bi 9 are considered to have  met the core requirement of Bi 1.  Chemistry The student™s qualifications for placing out of Ch 1 ab will only be deter -mined by the performance on a placement examination to be admin-istered in the summer prior to registration. Qualified students, with the  instructor™s consent, are allowed to substitute either Ch 8 or Ch/ChE 9  for the ﬂcoreﬂ chemistry laboratory requirement (Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x). English/Writing All incoming students (freshmen and transfers) will take a placement  assessment to determine whether they are adequately prepared for the  substantial writing component that is part of all freshman humanities  courses. Most new students participate in a web-based version of this assessment, which is usually conducted in early June. A makeup assessment is held just before fall classes begin. Based on results of  this writing assessment, students may be required to take Wr 1 or Wr  2 in the fall quarter. (Wr 1 and Wr 2 count for general Institute credit  only.) After completing these courses, students may, at the discretion of  humanities faculty, be required to go on to subsequent coursework in  academic writing, such as Wr 3, Wr 4, or Wr 50, before or concurrently  with freshman humanities coursework. During the first week of classes,  students will be required to produce an in-class writing sample to con -firm the initial placement.Mathematics During the summer before the freshman year, entering freshmen are  asked to take a diagnostic exam in basic calculus that will determine which students will be placed in a special section of Ma 1 a for those with less complete preparation, and later take Ma 1 d; and if they are  interested in advanced placement, they may also take an examination  Freshman Admission 186to determine whether they will begin the mathematics core sequence at  an advanced level. Normally, an entering freshman takes Ma 1 abc, Calculus of One and  Several Variables and Linear Algebra. This course covers the calculus  of functions of one and several variables; infinite series; vector algebra; basic and advanced linear algebra; derivatives of vector functions, multiple integrals, line and path integrals; and theorems of Green and  Stokes. The course is divided into a lecture part and a recitation part  that focuses mainly on problem-solving. Students in need of additional problem-solving practice may be  advised to take Ma 8 (in addition to Ma 1 a) in the first quarter. Physics The required freshman physics course, Ph 1 abc, is considerably more  rigorous than most advanced placement work, and entering freshmen  are encouraged to take Ph 1. A test is administered during the summer to  aid in the organization of Ph 1; students who have performed particularly  well can discuss the possibilities for advanced placement with the phys -ics representative during orientation.   A second test may then be required. Residency ExpectationUndergraduate housing includes the eight houses (Avery, Blacker,  Dabney, Fleming, Lloyd, Page, Ricketts, Ruddock), and the Bechtel  Residence and Marks House and Braun House. First- and second-year students are required to live on campus. Requests for exceptions  to this requirement should be submitted to the Office of Residential  Experience, and must be approved by the Dean of Undergraduate  Students and the Vice President for Student Affairs. New Student Orientation All freshmen, transfer, and exchange students are expected to attend  the New Student Orientation as part of the regular registration proce -dure. Orientation takes place the week prior to the beginning of class -es. Faculty members, staff and upperclass student leaders participate  help to introduce new students to the Caltech community. The orientation  period provides an opportunity for new students to become acquaint -ed with the campus, the Honor System, and other aspects of life at Caltech. In addition, they will meet classmates, upperclass students,  and faculty during this timeADMISSION TO UPPER CLASSES  BY TRANSFER TRANSFER ADMISSIONS Caltech admits transfer students for the fall term only. We require a  completed application, letters of recommendation, an official transcript  from the last secondary school attended and all colleges or universities  Undergraduate Information 187attended, descriptions of all college-level math and science courses, and completion of the Caltech Transfer Entrance Examinations. Please  review the section titled ﬂEligibility Criteria for Admission™™ to determine  whether you meet the eligibility requirements for transfer admissions  consideration. Academic Preparation The following is a list of the Caltech core curriculum, taken by all Caltech  students during their first two years. It is expected that transfer students  will have had exposure to mathematics and science courses on a compa -rable level prior to entry to Caltech. Any of the following core courses that  have not been covered by incoming transfer students must be taken upon  matriculation to Caltech. There are no specific topics expected to have  been covered in humanities and social science classes. An evaluation of each transfer student™s written English is required  prior to registration and may result in an additional course requirement. Freshman courses: Mathematics 1 abcPhysics 1 abcChemistry 1 abChemistry 3 a or 3 xBiology 1, 1 x, 8, or 9Humanities and Social Science electivesMenu science class (see page 240; can be taken freshman or soph -omore year) Sophomore courses: Physics 2 abc or Physics 12 abcAdditional laboratory scienceHumanities and Social Science electives Note: Mathematics 3 is not required for the core curriculum, but may  be required for a specific option.] Eligibility Criteria for Admission The Institute admits to its sophomore and junior classes a small num -ber of students who have excellent records at other institutions of  collegiate rank and who perform satisfactorily on the Caltech Transfer  Admissions Entrance Examinations.Students must have completed their secondary school    education, and have subsequently enrolled at a college or     university and earned credit, in order to be considered for    transfer admission. Transfer students are not admitted to the senior year at Caltech.  Students who have already completed a bachelor™s degree in     any subject are not eligible for transfer.  Standardized Test Requirements  Transfer applicants are not required to submit SAT scores. The Test of  English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) is required of transfer appli -Admission to Upper Classes by Transfer 188cants whose native language is not English and who have not school instruction in English for two years or more. The TOEFL should be  taken no later than the February test date.Evaluation of Written English All entering transfer students will be required to undergo an evaluation  of their written English prior to enrolling. Transfer Admissions Entrance Examinations  All applicants are required to take Caltech Transfer Admissions  Entrance Examinations in mathematics and physics. Further instruc-tions are included with the Caltech Transfer Application. Transfer of Credit  The courses for which transfer applicants will receive credit, and the  corresponding class standing, will be determined at the time of enroll -ment. The transfer applicant will submit course descriptions, syllabi, and final transcripts to the Registrar who will present the material to the  faculty for evaluation. Faculty members review each course submitted for credit on an indi -vidual basis. It is sometimes not possible, therefore, to answer ques -tions regarding the acceptability of course work taken elsewhere. Before  the student is admitted, transfer students will work through Admissions  to obtain a pre-evaluation estimate. If the standard of work taken  elsewhere is uncertain, additional examinations may be required  before the question of credit is finally determined. Graduation Requirements  Admitted transfer students must meet the following requirements in  order to receive a Caltech Bachelor of Science degree. A Caltech undergraduate degree is based on a four-year res -idential experience (study abroad included) in which students  have the time to explore their academic interests in a deep and  rigorous way. Students who are admitted as transfer students or  3/2 students may be granted advanced standing and term credit  for academic work accepted in transfer to Caltech. However,  transfer and 3/2 students must enroll for a minimum of six terms  at Caltech. Any exceptions must be approved by the dean  of undergraduate students and the vice president for student  affairs. Regardless of the amount of credit awarded upon matriculation,  transfer students must spend at least two years (six terms) in residence at Caltech. Students must also earn at least 216 units  at Caltech, not including courses taken to satisfy math and sci-ence core curriculum requirements. Students must take, or have taken the equivalent of, all core cur -riculum courses.Students must satisfy all of their chosen option™s degree require -ments. Transfer students may choose from among all Caltech  undergraduate options. Undergraduate Information 189Admissions ApplicationApplications are available by September 1. Completed applications should be received by the Office of Undergraduate Admissions by February 15. Applicants will be notified of the decisions of the Admissions Committee in early May. Information on the application process can be found on the admissions office website at www.admis-sions.caltech.edu. Students should apply online through the Coalition Application. For further information on admission, please call (626) 395-6341 or e-mail ugadmissions@caltech.edu. NONDISCRIMINATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY Caltech is committed to equal opportunity for all persons without regard to sex, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age,  marital status, pregnancy, gender, gender expression, gender identity,  sexual orientation, genetic information, status as disabled veteran, or other eligible veteran, for otherwise qualified individuals with a disabil-ity, or any other condition protected by the state and federal law. It is  the policy of Caltech to provide a work and academic environment free  of discrimination as required by federal and state law, including Title IX  which prohibits discrimination based on sex in Caltech™s educational  programs and activities. Caltech will take all reasonable steps to elimi -nate discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct in its work and academic environment. Inquiries concerning the application of Title IX  may be referred to Caltech™s Title IX Coordinator, Hima Vatti, who can  be reached at Equity or at 626-395-3132. THE 3/2 DUAL DEGREE PLAN Caltech invites students from a select group of liberal arts colleges to  transfer to Caltech upon completion of their junior year. After two years  in residence at Caltech, and the successful completion of our require -ments, 3/2 students will be granted a Bachelor of Science degree from  Caltech and a second bachelor™s degree from their liberal arts college.  Students may transfer into any of the Caltech options.Students from the following institutions are eligible to apply to the  3/2 program: Bowdoin College (ME)Ohio Wesleyan University (OH)  Bryn Mawr (PA) Pomona College (CA)Grinnell College (IA)Reed College (OR)Haverford College (PA) Spelman College (GA)Mt. Holyoke College (MA)Wesleyan University (CT) Oberlin College (OH)Whitman College (WA) Occidental College (CA)Admission to Upper Classes by Transfer 190Applications and a program description are available from the 3/2  liaison at each of the liberal arts college partners and from the Caltech  Office of Undergraduate Admissions. Instructions on how to cre -ate and complete Caltech™s online 3/2 application can be found at  admissions.caltech.edu. All 3/2 applications and support materials  must be submitted by April 1. Admission to the 3/2 program is not guaranteed and will be deter -mined by the Caltech Faculty Upperclass Admissions Committee.  Students applying should have a record of superior academic achieve -ment at their home institutions, and strong letters of recommendation  from their 3/2 liaison and an additional faculty member. They must  have completed a minimum of one year of calculus-based physics  and mathematics (two years are recommended), including multivariable  calculus and differential equations, and one year of chemistry.  EXCHANGE PROGRAMS Exchange programs exist with Occidental College and Art Center  College of Design, permitting Caltech students to receive credit for  courses taken at these colleges. Students from these colleges also  may receive credit for courses taken at the Institute. Tuition payments  are not required, but the student may have to pay any special fees.  The student must obtain approval from the instructor of the exchange  course. Exchange courses taken by Caltech students must have prior  approval by the student™s option, by the division providing courses  most similar to the proposed course, and by the registrar. Students  wishing to take such courses should obtain the appropriate form  at the Registrar™s Office, get the required signatures as above, and  return it to the registrar. Freshmen at Caltech ordinarily cannot partici -pate in this exchange.STUDY AWAY Study abroad or away allows students to experience life in other coun -tries and regions of the United States, and to gain a broader exposure  to the sciences, engineering, economics/management, the social sci-ences, and humanities.Please see the Financial Aid section of this catalog for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad or  Study Away. Note that supplemental charges and travel should be list -ed by the student in their financial aid budget so that these amounts can be considered when funding is calculated. Additional information, including application procedures and exact  deadline dates, is available from the Fellowships Advising and Study  Abroad Office at www.fasa.caltech.edu.  UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO STUDY AWAY PROGRAM Our newest program is an exchange with the University of Chicago.  Students will spend the fall term at the University of Chicago and live in a University of Chicago hall of residence in a single room. Students  are required to take at least two classes (18 units) in classes that will  Undergraduate Information 191fulfil option requirements. Students take a maximum of 4 classes and  can take up to 2 classes in the humanities or social sciences. A number of Chicago™s graduate schools will be visiting undergraduates to take  class. This is restricted to one class total, which is part of the maximum  of 4 classes. This requires a petition that is executed after a student is  nominated to the exchange and accepted by the University of Chicago and within the timeframe designated by the University of Chicago. Information on which graduate schools allow this is available in the exchange application materials. A minimum GPA of 3.5 is required to apply. Eligible sophomores  and juniors interested in either the fall or winter term should apply  by the January deadline for the fall term of the next academic year.  Further information, including application procedures, more about the  University of Chicago exchange, and the exact deadline date, is avail-able from the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad Office at www. fasa.caltech.edu. More information about the University of Chicago can  be found at www.uchicago.edu. Students are required to attend the fall orientation for which a fee  is charged, ~$400 to $500. The orientation takes place the week prior  to the start of the fall quarter. Since the University of Chicago is on a  quarter system, their fall term correponds closely to Caltech fall term  dates. Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study away. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid  application.STUDY ABROAD CAMBRIDGE SCHOLARS PROGRAMThe Caltech Cambridge Scholars Program offers qualified juniors and  seniors the opportunity to spend the fall or winter term at the University  of Cambridge in England. Students are hosted by and live in one of  the Cambridge Colleges participating in the program. The participating  colleges are Corpus Christi, Pembroke, St. Catharine™s, and St. John™s.  Students pay Caltech room, board, tuition, and other standard Caltech  fees for the term. There may be a small supplemental charge for room  and tuition. The supplement varies yearly depending on prices and the  exchange rate.Students are admitted into one Cambridge department in the biological  sciences, physical sciences, computer sciences, mathematics, or engi-neering sciences to take classes within the tripos, i.e., subject, offered by  that department. Students can only take courses in one tripos subject,  but can usually take classes from more than one part of the tripos in that  subject. Students will find more information on the tripos structure and  Cambridge University in the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad Office  or at www.cam.ac.uk. During the term at Cambridge, students take the equivalent of at least  36 Caltech units, usually four Cambridge courses, but may take in some  Study Abroad Programs 192subjects. For their classes, students receive a minimum of 36 Caltech units  that can be used to fulfill option requirements or to fulfill other Institute  course requirements. Note that the final number of units and whether the  units can be used to fulfill departmental requirements will be determined  after faculty review upon a student™s return to Caltech.  Caltech students have the use of all Cambridge facilities and are matric -ulated into the university for the term. A minimum 3.6 GPA is required to  apply. Eligible sophomores and juniors interested in either the fall or winter  term should apply by the January deadline for the next academic year.  Further information, including application procedures, and the exact dead -line date, is available from the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad  Office at www.fasa.caltech.edu. Students can find more information about  Cambridge at cam.ac.uk.Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligi-bility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive finan -cial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid application.  COPENHAGEN SCHOLARS PROGRAMThe Caltech Copenhagen Scholars Program offers qualified juniors  and seniors the opportunity to spend the fall at the University of Copenhagen (UCPH) or the Danish Technical University (DTU), both  universities in the Copenhagen metropolitan area. At UCPH students  will find courses offered in the physical or life sciences and computer  science. At DTU students can take courses in engineering, computer science, nanotechnology, applied physics, space sciences, and in a  broad range of science subjects, e.g., chemistry, physics, and mathe -matics. Students must select UCPH or DTU as their admitting univer-sity and will take all courses in the sciences/applied sciences at that university. All students are required to take a Danish language class  during the semester. Students live in a modern kollegiet (dormitory) with Danish students.  There may be a supplemental charge for the room due to the ~15  weeks long semester. The supplement varies yearly depending on pric -es and the exchange rate. Students admitted to UCPH live in a UCPH kollegiet and students admitted to DTU live in a DTU kollegiet.There is no board plan, but each kollegiet has a well-equipped kitch -en, and students may cook for themselves or with the other students on  the hall. In addition to the supplemental room charge, all students pay  standard board and tuition, but should budget additional funds for food  due to the length of the semester. Note that while students pay Caltech  board fees, the board fee is used to spend on food while in Copenhagen.  Students can cook in their kollegiet or eat out. Caltech fees are due by  the normal fall due date.Both UCPH and DTU are on a semester system, and Caltech students  attend from the last week of August to mid-December and are required  to participate in the one-week orientation or advising period the last  week of August. Students have a one-week vacation in mid-October, and  many use this vacation week to travel in Denmark or Europe.  Students take a maximum of 30 ECTS (European Credit Transfer  System) and at least two classes (18 Caltech units) must get option  credit of some type. All students take a class in the Danish language  Undergraduate Information 193offered at UCPH. Students attending Copenhagen University are  required to take a course in Danish culture and two Block 1 and one  Block 2 class. Students attending DTU may elect to take a class from  the Danish Culture series (monarchy, film, Vikings, etc.) if it fits their  schedule and they do not exceed 30 ECTS. units combined with their DTU classes and Danish language class at UCPH.All upper-level undergraduate or beginning graduate-level courses at  UCPH and DTU can be taught in English. Students admitted to DTU may take a class on the history of tech-nology, which may qualify for Humanities credit. DTU has a very intrigu -ing group of classes in management and in technology management.  These can be taken for social science or option credit with the permis -sion of the option representative. Students receive a minimum of 36 Caltech units (many receive more  units) that can be used for general or option credit or to fulfill other  Institute course requirements. Note that the final number of units and  whether the units can be used to fulfill departmental requirements will  be determined after faculty review upon a student™s return to Caltech. Students can enroll in an optional three-week-long Danish-language  course in August at either UCPH or DTU depending on their admitting university. This course is not required, but as noted, all students are  required to take Danish language during the fall semester for credit. Further information about the Copenhagen Scholars Program is  available in the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad Office and  online at: www.fasa.caltech.edu. Go to dtu.dk or ku.dk for further infor -mation on DTU or UCPH.Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid  application. A minimum 3.0 GPA is required.  ÉCOLE POLYTECHNIQUE SCHOLARS PROGRAM The École Polytechnique Scholars Program offers qualified juniors  and seniors the opportunity to spend the fall, winter, or spring term  at the École Polytechnique, which is located outside of Paris in the town of Palaiseau, about 40 minutes by train from Paris. Note that  the winter and spring terms can only be attended in years that do not overlap with Caltech term dates and only with the permission of École Polytechnique and Caltech. In addition, seniors may not attend the spring term if they plan to graduate in June.The École Polytechnique, often referred to by the nickname ﬂL™X,ﬂ is  the foremost French  grande école of engineering (according to French  and international rankings). Founded in 1794 and initially located in  the Latin Quarter in central Paris, it was moved to Palaiseau in 1976. It is one of the oldest and most prestigious engineering schools in the  world, with a very selective entrance exam. As one of the world™s fore -most establishments in science education, the École Polytechnique trains graduates who become outstanding scientists, engineers,  researchers, managers, and politicians. At École Polytechnique, students can take courses in one academic area called an approndisement. The subjects are engineering, computer  Study Abroad Programs 194science as well as the sciences, e.g., chemistry, physics, environmental  sciences (GPS students) and mathematics. Students can also take one class in the social sciences and humanities if their schedule permits. All  students take a French language class. Classes are taught in French or  English based on the instructor™s preference. However,  students must  have very good ability in speaking, reading, and writing French before  applying for this program.  Students will continue to take French at their  level while at École Polytechnique. École Polytechnique has different academic schedules depending on  the year of study. Caltech students who study at École Polytechnique  for the fall term can only select classes from the third year of the École  Polytechnique curriculum, and all classes must be selected from this  year™s curriculum. Note that the second-year classes are not allowed,  as this year goes from the fall through January and then has a second  semester versus two terms. The third-year specialized curriculum has a  schedule that corresponds closely to Caltech™s three-term system, and  students must take all classes from the third-year curriculum. These  classes are equivalent to 100-level classes at Caltech. A minimum 3.3 GPA is required to apply. Eligible sophomores and  juniors apply to study during their junior or senior year by the Caltech internal deadline, which is usually in January. Note that students must be nominated by Caltech in order to apply  and cannot apply without going through the internal Caltech nomination  process, which is run by the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad  Office. Only this office can provide the required nomination. Each year  application specifics will be provided to sophomores and juniors in the  fall. Students will be required to complete both Caltech Study Abroad  Proposal and Forms and complete the École Polytechnique application  forms as well as undergoing a formal assessment of French skills by  Caltech™s French instructor. Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid  application.EDINBURGH SCHOLARS PROGRAMThe Caltech Edinburgh Scholars Program offers qualified juniors and  seniors the opportunity to spend the fall at the University of Edinburgh.  The University of Edinburgh is on a semester system, and Caltech stu -dents attend from mid-September to mid-December. All students are  required to attend a weeklong orientation held the week before classes  start. All students live in university dormitories or flats, which are within  walking distance from the George Square (humanities and social scienc -es) and the King™s Buildings (the science and engineering campus). The  university operates a free shuttle bus from the George Square campus to  the King™s Buildings campus. Students pay Caltech room, board, tuition, and other standard  Caltech fees for the term. There is usually a supplemental charge for  housing due to the longer length of the term. The supplement varies yearly depending on prices and the exchange rate.Students are admitted into one of Edinburgh™s academic depart -Undergraduate Information 195ments in the College of Science and Engineering (CSE). Note that stu-dents cannot be admitted into the economics department because that is in the College of Humanities and Social Sciences, but they can take 20 credits in that department. Students, whose option is BEM or eco -nomics, are allowed to take 40 credits in economics in order to fulfill  BEM or economics option requirements if the student also takes 40  credits in the College of Science and Engineering. Students take a minimum of 60 Edinburgh credits per semester and  a maximum of 80 credits, but no more than five courses. Students will  take a minimum of two classes in the department is closest to their option and which will serve as the student™s admitting department. The  two required classes (18 Caltech units) varies from 20 to 40 Edinburgh  credits based on whether the two classes are 10 or 20 credit classes  each. Students can take all of their classes in their admitting depart-ment or can take classes in other CSE departments provided they  meet requirements. Students can take 20 credits (one course) in the  College of Arts Humanities and Social Sciences or up to two 40 cred -its in this college if they take 40 credits in the College of Science and  Engineering. Note that 60 credits (4 classes) is the standard course  load, but most Caltech students take 70 to 80 credits. Note that at  least 36 Caltech units must be taken, i.e., 4 classes/60 credits. A minimum 3.0 GPA is required to apply. Eligible sophomores and  juniors should apply by the January deadline for the fall semester at  Edinburgh. Further information, including application procedures and  exact deadline dates, is available from the Fellowships Advising and  Study Abroad Office: fasa.caltech.edu. Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid  application.LONDON SCHOLARS PROGRAMThe Caltech London Scholars Programs offers qualified juniors and  seniors the opportunity to spend a fall term at University College London, which is located in the lovely Bloomsbury area of London.  University College London (UCL) is on a semester system, and Caltech students attend UCL™s autumn semester from about the third week of  September to mid-December. All students are required to attend an  exchange student orientation the week before the semester begins.  Students also attend a new student orientation the first week of the semester. All students live in a UCL dormitory, which is located a short  walk or short bus ride from the academic buildings of the UCL campus.  Students pay Caltech room, board, tuition, and other standard Caltech  fees for the term. There is a supplemental charge for housing/board  due to the longer length of the term. The supplement varies yearly depending on prices and the exchange rate.Students are admitted into one of UCL™s academic departments in the  physical, life, or engineering sciences and must take at least 50% of their  classes in their Admitting Department. Usually the Admitting Department  is in a subject area that most closely corresponds to the student™s  Caltech option, but there is some leeway in this provided the student  Study Abroad Programs 196has the background to be admitted to the department in question in the  STEM subjects. Students cannot be admitted into humanities or social  science departments.The remaining 50 percent of classes can either be taken in the  Admitting Department, another department in the sciences or engineer-ing, or the humanities and social sciences with the exception of the  English literature department, the the Slade School of Design, which do  not admit visiting students, even those with majors in English literature  or the arts. Note that there are ample opportunities to take literature  courses from a number of departments that offer literature classes, e.g.,  Slavonic and East European studies, Classics, Scandinavian studies,  European cultural studies, Hebrew and Jewish studies, French, etc. Note  that these departments offer classes taught in translation and in the for -eign language.  A typical UCL semester class is 15 UCL credits. Caltech students  must take 60 UCL credits during their semester at UCL. This would be  equivalent to 36 Caltech units unless a class is equivalent to a 12-unit Caltech class. UCL classes fulfill option credit, humanities or social  science credit or general credit. Note that the final number of units and  whether the units can be used to fulfill departmental requirements will  be determined after faculty review upon a student™s return to Caltech. Students are only allowed to take Year One classes in the econom -ics department. Students can take higher level economics classes in the School of Eastern European and Slavonic Studies. A minimum 3.3 GPA is required to apply and some departments  such as Computer Science (3.9) or the Biological Sciences (3.5) require  a higher GPA. Advice on this can be obtained from Caltech™s study  abroad office.  Certain departments at UCL will not admit fall only exchange stu-dent. For this year the subjects include, mathematics, statistical scienc-es, physics, all engineering sciences except for mechanical engineer-ing, which does admit fall only students. Eligible sophomores and juniors apply by the January deadline for  the fall semester at UCL. Further information, including application procedures and exact deadline dates, is available from the Fellowships  Advising and Study Abroad Office. Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid  application.   MELBOURNE SCHOLARS PROGRAMThe Caltech Melbourne Scholars Programs offers qualified juniors  and seniors the opportunity to spend the summer/fall (Semester 2)  at the University of Melbourne, which is located in the vibrant city of  Melbourne, Australia. Melbourne is on a semester system, and Caltech  students attend Melbourne™s second semester from the second week  of July to the end of November. Since Melbourne is in the Southern  Hemisphere, the university™s first semester starts in July and crosses over  both the Caltech winter and spring terms. Therefore, students attend  Melbourne™s second semester, which corresponds better to Caltech™s  Undergraduate Information 197fall semester. All students are required to attend an orientation that takes  place at the University of Melbourne the week before the semester  begins.  Students live in a residence hall, which is located a short walk from  the academic buildings of the campus. Halls of residence have either an  apartment or suite setup and offer that vary by hall assigned such as a  15-meter outdoor swimming pool and lounge area, barbecue area, work -out gym (with plasma TV, cross trainers, free weights, treadmills, exercise  bikes, etc.), café, lounge, computer lab, and laundry. Students share a  suite or apartment with other students.  Students pay Caltech room, board, tuition, and other standard  Caltech fees for the term. There is a supplemental charge for housing/ board due to the longer length of the Melbourne semester. In some years  there could be a supplemental tuition charge. The supplement varies  yearly depending on prices and the exchange rate.Students take four classes at Melbourne. Each class is worth 12.5  Melbourne credit points. Of the four classes, students must take two  classes related to their option at Caltech and may take up to two outside  of their subject, including the humanities and social sciences. Students  are eligible to take one class as a research class in an area related to  their option.The Melbourne credit load would be equivalent to 36 to 45 Caltech  units. Melbourne classes can be used to fulfill option credit, humanities  or social science credit, or general credit requirements. Note that the final  number of units and whether the units can be used to fulfill departmental  requirements will be determined after faculty review upon a student™s  return to Caltech.  A minimum 3.0 GPA is required to apply. Eligible sophomores and  juniors apply by the fall deadline for the second semester starting in July.  Further information, including application procedures and exact dead -line dates, is available from the Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad  Office. Please see the Financial Aid section for details on applying for and  eligibility for financial aid related to study abroad. Students who receive  financial aid should list supplemental charges and travel in their aid appli -cation.ROTCAir Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) offers three- and  four-year programs leading to a commission as a second lieutenant in  the United States Air Force. The AFROTC program is open to almost all  students pursuing baccalaureate degrees. Classes consist of one hour of  academics and two hours of leadership laboratory per week for freshmen  and sophomores, and three hours of academics and two hours of lead -ership laboratory per week for juniors and seniors. AFROTC offers a vari -ety of scholarships valued at up to 100 percent of annual tuition, along  with a nontaxable monthly stipend. By agreement through the Air Force,  Caltech students enroll in Air Force ROTC classes at the University of  Southern California, California State University San Bernardino, Loyola  Marymount University, or the University of California, Los Angeles. You  ROTC198do not need to be a student at any of these colleges to attend AFROTC  on their campuses. For more information, contact the Department of  Aerospace Studies at afrotcdet060@rotc.usc.edu or call (213) 740-2670  or visit usc.edu/afrotc. No military commitment is incurred until entering  the junior year of the program or receipt of a scholarship after the fresh -man year. The Army ROTC program at USC offers four-, three-, and two-year  full-tuition scholarships up to $43,000 a year. In addition, the program  pays all contracted cadets a stipend of $3,500 to $5,000 a year and an  annual book allowance of another $1,200. High-school students need  to apply for the four-year scholarship during the fall of their senior year,  and no later than November 15. All Caltech students interested in an  Army ROTC three- or two-year on-campus scholarship need to apply  early in their spring semester, and no later than March 15, for the next  academic year. Completion of the program leads to a commission as a  Second Lieutenant in one of 14 occupational branches in the Regular  Army, Army Reserve, or the National Guard. These scholarship provi -sions are subject to change, and interested students are encouraged to  contact the Department of Military Science at the University of Southern  California for further information: PED 110, Los Angeles, CA 90089, (213)  740-1850.REGISTRATION REGULATIONS  PROCEDURES Students must register on the dates specified in the academic cal -endar. Students are not registered until they have both  enrolled in an approved list of courses,  andare current with the Bursar™s Office. All undergraduate students  with an outstanding Bursar™s bill balance of $300 or more and  graduate students with a Bursar™s bill balance of $1,500 or more  will have a hold placed on their registration for the subsequent  quarter the day before online registration opens. The hold will be  released once students have paid their bill in full or worked out a  satisfactory payment plan with the Bursar™s Office. Any student who has not completed both parts of registration  within one week after the first day of classes will be removed from  the Institute rolls. A student on leave from, or not registered with, the  Institute may not attend classes, live in Institute housing, participate in Institute programs, use Institute facilities, work on campus, or use  student services such as Wellness Services, Center for Inclusion &  Diversity, Careers, Advising, and Experiential Learning (CAEL), or the  Hixon Writing Center during the leave, unless approved in writing by  the Dean of Students or designee. The Institute can place a hold on a student™s registration in a variety of circumstances including any failure  to comply with Institute requirements. Students are required to maintain continuity of registration until the  requirements for the Bachelor of Science degree are fulfilled, except in  the case of an approved undergraduate student leave.  Undergraduate Information 199CHANGES IN REGISTRATION  All changes in registration must be reported to the Registrar™s Office  by the student prior to the published deadlines. A grade of F will be given in any course for which a student registers and which they do not  either complete satisfactorily or drop. A course is considered dropped  when a student drops the course in REGIS or notifies the Registrar™s  Office in writing. A student may not at any time withdraw from a course  that is required for graduation in their option, without permission of the  registrar. A student may not add a course after the last day for adding cours-es, or withdraw from a course after the last date for dropping courses,  without the approval of the Undergraduate Academic Standards and  Honors (UASH) Committee. In cases where the late addition of a course  would have put the student in a position of overload by Add Day of the term concerned, the student must also obtain an approved retroactive  overload from the dean or associate dean of undergraduate students.  Registration for added courses is complete when a student registers  for the course on REGIS or sends a written request to the Registrar™s  Office with the  proper approvals. No credit will be given for a course for  which a student has not properly registered. The responsibility for regis -tering or dropping courses (in REGIS or by direct communication with  the Registrar™s Office) is on the student. Failure to fulfill the responsibil -ity because of oversight or ignorance is not sufficient grounds to peti -tion for permission to drop or add courses after the deadline.  Humanities Drop Policy Students who do not attend the first class of the term will be auto-matically dropped from the class. Students who notify the instructor in  advance of their inability to attend the first class may remain enrolled in  the class at the instructor™s discretion. Academic AdvisementStudents will be assigned freshmen advisers, and later option advis -ers, who will guide students to resources about the curriculum, grad -uation requirements, and Institute policies and procedures. Through  the academic advising experiences at Caltech, students will develop an educational plan for successfully achieving their goals and select courses each quarter to progress toward fulfilling that educational plan.  Undergraduate students are required to meet with their adviser at least  once a year. Failure to meet at least once prior to the start of spring  term will result in a hold placed on the student™s record which will pre -vent them from registering online.  Summer Research or Summer Reading  Qualified undergraduate students who are regular students at the  Institute are permitted to engage in research or reading during the  summer, but in order to receive academic credit the student must  have the approval of their division and must complete the registration  process for such summer work before June 1. Any requests to add  research after June 1 must be submitted as a Late Add petition to the  Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee (UASH) as  Registration Regulations200well as be approved by the Division Chair. An undergraduate may not  receive payment for research carried out for academic credit. Students  who are registered for summer research or reading will not be required  to pay tuition for the units. A student may apply up to 18 units of sum-mer research per summer and 36 units in total toward Institute gradua -tion requirements. UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT LEAVES OF ABSENCE  Voluntary Leaves  Personal LeavesA student may request a voluntary leave of absence for personal rea -sons (personal leave) by submitting a written petition via completion of the undergraduate leave form. International students should consult  with the International Student Programs Office regarding visa implica -tions prior to submitting the leave petition.The dean or designee may grant a personal leave provided (a) the  student is in good standing, in other words does not have to meet spe -cial academic or disciplinary requirements as a result of reinstatement,  (b) the leave is for one year or less, although special circumstances can  be considered for a longer leave, and (c) the leave extends over a peri -od that includes at least one full term.A student on personal leave may not attend classes, live in Institute housing, participate in Institute programs, use Institute facilities, work  on campus, or use student services such as the Health and Counseling Services, Center for Inclusion & Diversity, or the Hixon Writing Center  during the leave, unless approved in writing by the dean or designee.  Career Advising and Experiential Learning (CAEL) is, by default, open  to all students who have not been permanently separated from the  Institute, regardless of leave or registration status, unless otherwise  revoked by the director of CAEL. A disciplinary proceeding brought against a student may continue  during the period that a student is on a personal leave.  The Institute reserves the right to impose discipline against a student on personal  leave should circumstances warrant. A petition to return from a personal leave should be submitted six (6)  weeks before the first day of the term for which the student intends to  return.  Medical LeavesIf a student is unable to complete their coursework due to medical reasons, the student may petition for a medical leave of absence by  submitting a written petition via completion of the undergraduate leave  form. The dean or designee may grant a leave for medical reasons,  provided the petition is recommended by the director of Health and  Counseling Services or designee. International students should consult  with the International Student Programs Office regarding visa implica -tions prior to submitting the medical leave petition.Medical leaves are expected to extend over a period that includes at  Undergraduate Information 201least one full term, although special circumstances may be considered  for approval of a shorter leave upon the recommendation of a student™s  treatment team.  Students must provide documentation of the need for the leave  by a licensed treatment provider. Students may be required to sign  a release of information form authorizing their treatment provider to  communicate relevant medical information to representatives within  Health and Counseling Services and the Dean™s Office to facilitate  evaluation of the need for the leave and to determine appropriate  conditions associated with the leave and establishing expectations for  return from the leave.  The Institute may impose conditions on return from a medical  leave, which may include confirmation from the student™s health care  provider that the student is following the recommended course of treat -ment, the student™s consent for the provider to discuss the student™s  condition or progress during the leave with Caltech officials, including  representatives of Health and Counseling Services and the Dean™s  Office, and an independent evaluation of the student™s readiness to  return by a qualified medical professional. Certain conditions of return  will be specified at the time of the leave approval.  A petition to return from medical leave must be submitted six (6)  weeks before the first day of the term for which the student intends  to return. The return process includes an interview with the director  of Health and Counseling Services and the submission of a complet-ed return from medical leave and provider recommendation forms.  Students are expected to sign a release of information form authorizing  their treatment providers to communicate with Caltech, including rep -resentatives of Health and Counseling Services and the Dean™s Office  to determine readiness to return and recommendations for reasonable  accommodations. Final approval of the petition is the responsibility  of the dean or designee. If the student is permitted to return from the  leave, any conditions of return will be communicated to the student in  writing.A student returning from a leave for medical reasons will maintain  the same academic standing that they had previously and will be  subject to the same academic requirements for maintaining academic  progress unless an exception is grantedŠi.e., if on academic pro -bation, the student will remain on probation upon return from leave.  Additional information and resources regarding medical leave, including  financial and transcript implications, can be found at deans.caltech.edu.  While on Medical Leave It is the expectation that a student on medical leave will focus on receiving treatment to manage the condition(s) that precipitated the  leave. A student on medical leave may not attend classes, live in Institute housing, participate in Institute programs, use Institute facil -ities, work on campus, or use student services such as Health and Counseling Services, Center for Inclusion & Diversity, or the Hixon  Writing Center during the leave, unless approved in writing by the dean  or designee. areer Advising and Experiential Learning (CAEL) is, by  Registration Regulations202default, open to all students who have not been permanently separated from the Institute, regardless of leave or registration status, unless oth -erwise revoked by the director of CAEL.  Pregnancy LeaveConsistent with Caltech policy and the requirements of Title IX, stu -dents who are unable to complete their coursework or other course of  study for a period of time due to a pregnancy, childbirth, and related  medical conditions are eligible for a medical leave of absence. Students  who are pregnant or who have recently given birth are also eligible for  reasonable accommodations.  A pregnant student who wishes to take a medical leave should sub -mit a completed petition to the Dean of Undergraduate Students Office  after obtaining a recommendation from the director of Health and  Counseling Services. Medical documentation from the student™s treat -ing medical provider is required.  The Institute also provides reasonable accommodations to pregnant  students consistent with federal and state law. Reasonable accommo -dations may include allowing pregnant students to maintain a safe dis -tance from hazardous substances, allowing them to make up tests and  assignments that are missed for pregnancy-related reasons or excusing  of absences that are medically necessary.   Bonding An enrolled student in good academic standing who chooses to take  a leave of absence because of the birth of their child may request a  bonding leave by submitting a completed petition form to the Dean of Undergraduate Students Office for approval.   Involuntary LeaveThe dean or designee may determine that it is necessary to place a student on an involuntary leave in a variety of circumstances, including  when a student demonstrates behavior that poses a threat to health or  safety, causes significant disruption to the Caltech community, for the  personal safety or welfare of the student involved, as an interim mea -sure, or as a result of a disciplinary action.  The dean may impose an involuntary leave in appropriate circum -stances, such as where a student™s behavior: (1) has, or threatens to,  cause significant property damage; (2) significantly disrupts the Caltech  community; (3) presents a substantial risk of harm to self or others; (4)  indicates the student is unable or unwilling to carry out self-care obli -gations; or (5) violates a Caltech policy or the honor system. An invol-untary leave also may be imposed when that the student requires a  level of care from the Institute community that exceeds the reasonable  accommodations, resources and staffing that the Institute can reason -ably be expected to provide for the student™s well-being.   Emergency Leave If the dean determines that a student™s continued presence is likely to  pose a substantial risk to the safety and well-being of the student or Undergraduate Information 203others, the dean may place the student on an emergency interim leave  before a final determination is made. The dean will consider relevant  information, including relevant information provided by the student,  if available within the timeframe needed to make a decision, before  deciding on an emergency interim leave. An emergency interim leave  will remain in effect until a final decision has been made.  Review and Decision ProcessIf the conduct has been the subject of an investigation or review under  an Institute process or procedure, the dean will consider the findings  and conclusions reached in that process. In other circumstances  described above, in making an informed decision to place a student on involuntary leave, the dean will conduct an individualized assessment and consider relevant information including information provide in a  timely manner by the student.The dean may consult with other Institute personnel, including but not limited to, security and residential life personnel, staff, faculty, and  other individuals or departments. If appropriate and feasible, the dean  may seek cooperation and involvement of parents or guardians of the  student. Medical information, including medical information provided in a  timely manner by the student, may be considered if the behavior is  associated with a physical or mental condition. In appropriate cases,  the dean may consult with the director of Health and Counseling  Services, or designee, and/or require a physical or mental evaluation  from a health professional if the dean believes such an evaluation  is necessary in order to make an informed decision. Students are  expected, if necessary, to sign a release of information to facilitate  discussions between Caltech and the health professional conducting  the evaluation. The dean will also consider whether relevant risk factors  can be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level through reason -able accommodation. AppealA decision by the dean to place a student on involuntary leave may be appealed in writing within 10 days to the vice president for student  affairs (or designee). If the leave is imposed as a sanction resulting from  a finding of responsibility under an Institute process any applicable lim -itations on grounds for appeal will apply.  Written Decision The student will be advised in writing of the decision to impose an involuntary leave. The dean may stipulate conditions that must be met before the student may return. An involuntary leave may be a perma -nent separation from the Institute (i.e. expulsion); for a specific duration  or until certain conditions have been met. If the involuntary leave is not a permanent separation, the student will be advised of the length of the leave and/or any conditions for return.  Registration Regulations204While on LeaveA student on involuntary leave may not attend classes, live in Institute housing, participate in Institute programs, use Institute facilities, work  on campus, or use student services such as Health and Counseling Services, Center for Inclusion & Diversity, or the Hixon Writing Center  during the leave, unless approved in writing by the dean or designee.  A student on interim involuntary leave may be permitted to remain in  Caltech housing and have continued access to student services such as Health and Counseling Services until a final decision is made, if appropriate under the circumstances and as approved by the dean.  Return from LeaveA student on involuntary leave will not be allowed to return until the  dean makes a fact-specific assessment of the circumstances, considers  relevant risk factors, and concludes that the student does not pose a  significant disruption to the functioning of the Institute community and/or  does not pose a substantial risk to the health and safety of the student  or others. The dean will consider relevant information, including informa -tion provided by the student. In cases where a student has a physical or  mental condition associated with the behavior triggering the leave, the  dean will also consider whether the relevant risks can be eliminated by  a reasonable accommodation. The dean may consult with other Institute  administrators, as appropriate, in making their decision. The student will  be notified in writing of the dean™s determination of whether the student  will be permitted to return from a leave, will not be permitted to return  from the leave, or will be permanently separated from the Institute. If the  student is permitted to return from the leave, any conditions of return will  be communicated to the student in writing.   Withdrawal from the Institute  Formal separation from the Institute is effected by filing a completed  undergraduate leave form in the dean of students office to be forward -ed to the registrar and other appropriate offices. The effective date of a  withdrawal is entered by the dean or designee. A student withdrawing  from the Institute at any time during the term without filing a formal  undergraduate leave form will not be considered withdrawn. In such  a case, any grades reported by the instructors will be recorded on  the official transcript, and the grade of F will be recorded for all other  courses. A student who withdraws, or is absent for a term (or longer), without an approved undergraduate student leave must petition for  reinstatement to return to the Institute. Return from involuntary leave  requires approval through the dean of students office. Reinstatement  rules are listed under scholastic requirements. If the withdrawal occurs  after Add Day of any term, a W (standing for ﬂwithdrawnﬂ) will be recorded on the student™s transcript for all courses in which the stu -dent is enrolled. A grade of W is not included in the computation of the  student™s grade-point average. The record will also indicate whether an  undergraduate student leave was granted.  Undergraduate Information 205SCHOLASTIC REQUIREMENTS All undergraduates are required to meet certain scholastic standards as  outlined subsequently. ELIGIBILITY TO BE ENROLLEDAll undergraduate students must complete a minimum of 27 units per  term with a grade-point average of at least 1.9 in order to be eligible  to remain enrolled in classes. Freshmen are not held to the 1.9 GPA  requirement during the first two terms when all courses are taken pass/ fail. A student may be excused from the 27-unit eligibility requirement  if an underload petition has been approved, prior to Add Day, by the  dean or associate dean of undergraduate students. Under exceptional  circumstances the deans may waive the requirement that such a petition  be approved prior to Add Day, but may do so only once during that stu -dent™s career at Caltech. In addition, students must earn a total of 108  units per year; this averages to 36 units per term. The 108 unit require -ment may be waived in the case of an approved underload by Add Day,  terms away, or having been academically ineligible in one of the past  three terms.  When a student is ineligible for the first time, students are to send a  reinstatement petition to the dean or associate dean of undergraduate  students. The dean may choose to reinstate them, in which case they  will be on academic probation. Alternatively, the dean may direct them to  petition the Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee  (UASH) for reinstatement. UASH will either approve their petition for  reinstatement and place them on academic probation, or require them to  withdraw from the Institute for at least two terms.  When a student becomes ineligible a second time, they will be  required to withdraw from the Institute for at least two terms. Summer  does not count as a term. A student who has been required to leave the  Institute because of academic ineligibility may, after at least two terms  of leave, petition the Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors  (UASH) Committee for reinstatement. The UASH Committee™s decision  regarding reinstatement will be based largely on whether or not such  students have made good use of their time while away from the Institute.  Useful activities include being gainfully employed, having an internship,  engaging in a significant amount of volunteer work, or successfully com-pleting courses at another college or university. The Committee will also  expect that students applying for reinstatement will have completed work  in all Caltech classes in which they had received an E or I grade.  Students who are ineligible to petition may request an exception to  the above. To do so, they must first obtain permission from two of the  following three individuals: the dean of undergraduate students, the chair  of the UASH Committee, and the Registrar. Such requests require that a  reinstatement petition be sent to the Registrar™s Office at least three days  prior to the next UASH Committee meeting™s published deadline. When a student becomes ineligible a third time, they will not be  allowed to continue to enroll at Caltech. Scholastic Requirements 206DEPARTMENTAL AND OPTION REGULATIONS  Selection of Option By the middle of the third term, freshmen must notify the Registrar™s  Office of their selection of an option in engineering, humanities, social  sciences, or science to be pursued in subsequent years. Upon the selection of an option, a freshman will be assigned an adviser in that  option, whose approval must then be obtained for registration for the  following year. Undergraduate students may request to add an approved minor to  their program of study. The request for a minor must be approved by  the option representatives of the student™s option and proposed minor. A  plan must be presented which meets the minimum requirements for both  the option and the minor, but the option representatives may impose  additional requirements as well. The approved request must be submit -ted to the registrar before the start of the senior year.  Undergraduate students may be allowed to major in two options  for the Bachelor of Science degree. In order to do so the student must  present a rationale for the double option and a plan of study leading to  completion of the degree in four years. The plan, and any substantive  modifications, must be approved by a committee composed of the  option representatives of the two options. The plan must meet the min -imum requirements for both options as set forth in this catalog, but the  committee may impose additional requirements as well. The approved  plan should be submitted to the registrar during the sophomore year,  but in any case no later than the start of the senior year. The student will  then be assigned an adviser by each option. Consult the registrar for  appropriate procedures. Continuing in an Option Students whose grade-point averages are less than 1.9 at the end of  an academic year in a specific group of subjects designated by their  department or option may, at the discretion of their department, be  refused permission to continue the work of that option. Such disbar -ment does not prevent the students from continuing in some other  option or from taking additional courses to raise their average in  their original option. Students without an option will fall under the direct  jurisdiction of the dean of students. Students may remain without an  option for no more than one year. Change of Option An undergraduate in good standing at the Institute shall be permitted to  transfer into any option of their choice provided they have (a) a 1.9  GPA in subjects required for graduation in that option or in a specific  group of subjects designated by that option or (b) permission of the  option representative or committee. A change of option is effected by  obtaining a Change of Option petition from the Registrar™s Office. The  completed petition must then be signed by the option representative  for the new option (who will assign a new adviser), and filed with the  Registrar™s Office. Institute regulations require that a student who has  made normal progress at the Institute be able to change options at any  Undergraduate Information 207time up to the end of the sophomore year without penalty either as  to time until graduation or as to excessive unit requirements in any  term.Term Examinations  Term examinations will be held in all subjects unless the instructor  in charge of any subject shall arrange otherwise. No student will be  exempt from these examinations. When conflicts exist in a student™s  schedule, it is the student™s responsibility to report the conflict to the  instructor in charge of one of the conflicting examinations and make  arrangements for another time.Satisfactory Academic Progress  Eligibility to register is determined by the student™s record as of the first  day of classes of the term in which registration is sought. A student will  be declared ineligible to register if they have completed fewer than 27  units with a 1.9 grade point average in the previous term. Graduation Requirement  To qualify for graduation a student must complete the prescribed work  in one of the options with a passing grade in each required subject and  with a grade-point average of 1.9. A grade of F in an elective course need not be made up, provided the student has received passing  grades in enough other accepted units to satisfy the minimum total requirements of the option. A Caltech undergraduate degree is based on a four-year residential  experience (study abroad included) in which students have the time to  explore their academic interested in a deep and rigorous way. Students  who are admitted as transfer students or 3/2 students may be granted  advanced standing and term credit for academic work accepted in  transfer to Caltech. However, transfers and 3/2 students must enroll for  a minimum of six terms at Caltech. All other regularly admitted students  must enroll for four years (12 terms). Any exceptions to the four year  residence requirement must be approved by the dean of undergraduate  students and the vice president for student affairs. Candidacy for the Bachelor™s Degree  Students must declare their candidacy for the degree of Bachelor of  Science to the registrar on or before the first Monday of November  preceding the date on which they expect to receive the degree. All  subjects required for graduation, with the exception of those for which  the candidate is registered during the last term of their study, must be  completed and the grade recorded by the second Monday of May pre -ceding commencement.Graduation in the Normally Prescribed Time  Any undergraduate student who fails to complete the requirements for  graduation at the end of 12 terms must petition the Undergraduate  Academic Standards and Honors Committee for approval to register  for further work each term.Scholastic Requirements 208Excess of or Fewer Than Normal Units (Overloads and Underloads) An overload is defined as registration for more than 48 units for an  undergraduate. This limit corresponds to five 9-unit classes plus a  3-unit non-academic class (PE, PVA, SA) or four 9-unit classes plus  one 12-unit class. Classroom and laboratory courses are to be limited  to 45 units for freshmen for the first two terms and the remaining three  units should be used for frontier (ﬁpizzaﬂ) courses, PE, PVA, SA, or  research. Students may take up to 51 units (inclusive) but it requires  their adviser™s approval for such an overload. To take more units than  51, students will need to petition the undergraduate dean, with the  expectation that permission will be granted only in exceptional cases. This policy is aimed at having no effect on currently recommended  courses of studies in all options, while putting a very high bar for taking 6 full-time classes simultaneously.  A student who wishes to carry an overload in any term must  obtain the approval of their adviser and the dean or associate dean of  undergraduate students. Petitions for overloads must be submitted one  week before the last day for adding classes in any term.  An underload is registration for fewer than 36 units. Underload  petitions for freshmen, sophomores, and juniors must be approved  by the adviser and the dean or associate dean of undergraduate stu -dents. Seniors may take an underload by presenting for the Registrar™s  approval a senior underload petition and a course plan for graduation  the following June that does not require an overload in any term.  Completing fewer than 27 units without prior approval will result in inel -igibility; for more information on eligibility, see  page 205. Underloads during the first 12 terms will not result in a tuition reduction, only in  a reduction in financial aid. After completing 12 terms, tuition will be  charged per unit. The dean or disability services coordinator will eval -uate exceptions due to medical reasons. For more information about  underloads and tuition, see pages 212-213. For more information about  impact to aid, see page 229.ALLOWANCE AND TRANSFER OF CREDIT  Transfer of Credit from Other Institutions  Regularly enrolled students who want to obtain credit for college  courses taken elsewhere should obtain the permission of the dean of  students and have a copy of the transcript of their work sent to the Registrar™s Office. The student should then obtain an Allowance of  Credit form from the Registrar™s Office and take this, with the transcript  as well as any supporting class materials required by the option repre -sentative, to the representative of the option in which credit is desired.  Pending approval by the option representative, credit will be granted  when the Allowance of Credit form, with the appropriate signatures, is  returned to the office. Allowance of Credit in the Humanities and Social Sciences  In general, Caltech students should fulfill Caltech course require -Undergraduate Information 209ments by taking courses at Caltech. Students are expected to have a  well-reasoned educational goal for taking classes elsewhere. The only  exceptions are transfer students admitted to advanced standing. Credit  for comparable work done at other institutions with similar academic standards is not granted automatically. Students who wish to take courses elsewhere (whether on leave, in  the summer, or during the academic year) should consult,  in advance, with the executive officer for the humanities or the executive officer for  the social sciences, or their designees, to minimize any misunderstand-ing regarding the nature of credit they may receive. Upon completion  of the course, the student must obtain an Allowance of Credit form  from the registrar, obtain the signed approval of the executive officer,  or their designee, for transfer credit, and return the completed form to  the Registrar™s Office. The executive officers are the final authority in the  allowance of credit in HSS courses. Guidelines and specific information about allowance of credit are  available from the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences. Other Allowances of Credit  Except for transfer credit and credit based on Caltech placement exams  upon admission, credit will not be granted for Caltech courses in which  the student is not officially enrolled, except in special circumstances by  arrangement with the instructor. Such arrangements must be approved  by the Curriculum Committee, and the student must petition the  Committee before the work is undertaken. UNDERGRADUATE EXPENSES  For freshmen and transfer students applying for admission, there is a  $75 application fee. This fee is nonrefundable. Housing contracts must be submitted to the Housing Office by the  date specified in the instructions accompanying the contract.EXPENSE SUMMARY 2021-2022 General:General deposit............................................. $100.001Orientation fee............................................... $500.001Tuition............................................................  $56,364.00                 1This charge is made only once during residence at the Institute. Other:Student fees–............................................... $2,316.00Room (contract price)..................................... $10,398.002Board (5 days / week )–...............................  $7,350.00Books and supplies (est.)–........................... $1,428.00Personal expenses (est.)–............................ $2,091.002 The housing/room rate is calculated based on the weighted average of all available undergrad -uate on-campus housing options.Undergraduate Expenses 210The tuition and fees charge for all students is payable in full before  the first day of classes unless the student enrolls in the Direct Cost  Three Payment Plan through the Bursar™s Office. The fee to enroll in the  plan is $25.00 per term. Enrollment in the Direct Cost Three Payment  Plan must be completed by August 10, 2021. Fees are subject to  change at the discretion of the Institute. Tuition for the baccalaureate degree is based on four years (12  terms) of residence regardless of unit load each term or if a student  completes graduation requirements a term(s) early. The 12 term resi -dence requirement is separate from and in addition to any other degree  requirements. Official study abroad programs listed in the Catalog fulfill  one term of the 12 term requirement. Since a Caltech degree is based on a four-year residential require -ment, entering students should expect to be in residence and to be  billed tuition for a full four years. Any exceptions must be approved by  the dean of undergraduate students and the vice president for student  affairs. In addition, aid may not be disbursed to a student to cover full  tuition if they are no longer attending classes. REFUNDS AND FEES Refunds and RepaymentsFor all students, the institutional charges, e.g., tuition and room and  board, will be prorated according to the amount of time the student  spent in academic attendance before withdrawing from the Institute  before the end of the sixth week of the term. These prorated charges  will be compared to the payments received on behalf of the student,  and the Institute will determine whether the student is entitled to a refund or owes additional funds to Caltech. For students receiving funds from federal Title IV, from Caltech, and/ or from state programs, the Institute will follow federal and other appli -cable regulations to determine the amount of all program funds the  student has earned at the time of withdrawal. In general, the amount  of financial aid earned is based on the amount of time the student has  spent in academic attendance. If the amount of aid disbursed to the student is greater than the amount the student has earned, unearned  funds must be returned. If the amount the student was disbursed is  less than the amount the student earned, the student will be eligible to  receive a post-withdrawal disbursement. Determining the Student™s Last Date  of Attendance or Withdrawal DateThe Office of the Registrar is responsible for obtaining requests for  withdrawal from the undergraduate or graduate dean and for process -ing official withdrawals. In order to calculate the refund or repayment,  Caltech will establish the student™s withdrawal date. This date is one of  the following:the date that the student began the withdrawal process pre -scribed by Caltech;the date the student otherwise provided official notification to  Undergraduate Information 211the registrar (written or oral) of their intent to withdraw; the midpoint of the academic term if no official notification is  provided; the date determined by the registrar if there are special  circumstances (illness, accident, grievous personal loss); or the date the registrar determines the student has not returned  from an approved student sabbatical or if the student does not  qualify for a sabbatical.Academically Related Activities that Determine Academic AttendanceThe Institute may use the last date of attendance at an academically related activity as the student™s withdrawal date. This may occur if a  student begins the withdrawal process and then attends an academi -cally related activity after that date. Caltech considers an academically  related activity to include the following: attendance at a labattendance at a lecture completing a quiz and/or testparticipation in a study sessionacademic counseling sessionacademic advisement sessionturning in a class assignment Determining the Return of Federal Funds The Financial Aid Office and/or the Graduate Office will calculate  the federal funds that must be returned to the appropriate federal  accounts.If a student withdraws from the Institute prior to the first day of  classes for the period of enrollment, Caltech will return 100 percent of  the student™s federal financial aid in accordance with federal proce -dures, as well as Caltech and/or state grants or aid. If a student withdraws any time after the first day of classes for the period of enrollment, the Institute will perform the following: Determine the percentage of the payment period that the  student completed. If the student completed more than 60  percent of the period, they earned 100 percent of the aid for  the period. If the student completed 60 percent or less, the  percentage of the period completed is the percentage of aid  earned. This percentage is determined by dividing   the number  of days attended in the period of enrollment by the total days  in the period.Apply the earned percentage to the amount of aid actually  disbursed and the amount that could have been disbursed  (ﬂearned aidﬂ). Subtract earned aid from aid that was actually disbursed. This  results in the amount of unearned aid to be returned. The Financial Aid Office and/or the Graduate Office (as appro - Undergraduate Expenses 212priate) will allocate the return of funds back to the student aid  programs in the following order: 1. Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan Program 2. Federal Direct Subsidized Stafford Loan Program 3. Federal Perkins Loan Program 4. Federal Direct PLUS Loan Program 5. Federal Pell Grant Program 6. Federal SEOG Program 7. 7. Other Title IV programs Any remaining refund will be returned to the other state, institutional,  or private student assistance utilized. Federal Work Study is not includ -ed in any of these calculations.Appeals on RefundsAny questions or problems related to refunds should be directed to the  Bursar™s Office. For further information on refunds and repayments, con -tact the Financial Aid Office, the Graduate Office, or the Bursar™s Office. UnderloadsStudents who register for less than 36 units (ﬂUnderloadﬂ) will not  receive a reduction of tuition. Full tuition will be charged to underloading  students™ accounts. Also, applicable financial aid will be reduced, in under -load situations. For specific information on underload requirements, and  special circumstances where an underload may be granted, see page 208.  Information regarding financial aid and underloads can be found on page  229, Part-Time Enrollments (Underloads.) For those undergraduate students who are eligible for underloading  after completing 12 terms or by approved medical exception (page 208),  the tuition will be charged as of Add Day at an AY2021-2022 rate of  $522.00 per unit plus $772.00 for student fees per term, with a minimum  ten unit charge of $5,992.00 per term. Dropping a Course Students who are not enrolled full-time as of the last day to add  courses will have their aid revised. Generally, students enrolling less  than three-fourths time will have an increased work award. Additional  information is available in the Financial Aid Office. For more information  about impact to aid, see page 229, Underloads and Financial Aid. Refund upon WithdrawalWhen a student, for whatever reason, withdraws from Caltech during  an academic term, a refund of tuition as well as room and board, if  applicable, is calculated. The amount of refund is determined by how  much of the term has elapsed. If the student is a recipient of student  financial assistance, that assistance, if applicable, will be reduced as  a result of their withdrawal. Recent federal legislation determines the  amount of refund for recipients of federal Title IV student assistance. It  is the purpose of this section to inform students of the financial impli-cations of withdrawal.If the student is not a recipient of federal financial aid, the Institute™s  refund policy returns any refund of tuition or room and board first to the  Undergraduate Information 213programs from which assistance has been received (i.e., scholarships,  Caltech gift assistance). Any amount remaining will then be returned  to the student. The nonŒTitle IV portion will be distributed as appro -priate, first to outside agencies, as required, then to the Caltech grant,  scholarship, or loan, depending on the composition of the aid package. These distributions will occur as credits to the appropriate aid funds  and charge(s) to the student™s Caltech account. If the student is the recipient of federal Title IV student assistance,  any refund must then be applied first to the federal aid program(s) in  the prescribed order listed  on page 211.In the event that a student™s disbursed financial aid exceeds the  direct costs on the student™s personal account, a credit balance will  result. Withdrawal will result in the reversal or repayment of the result -ing credit balance. General Deposit Each new student is required at their first registration to make a gen -eral deposit of $100, to cover possible loss and/or damage of Institute property. Upon graduation or withdrawal from the Institute, any remain -ing balance of the deposit will be applied to the student™s outstanding  balance or refunded if there is no unpaid balance. Fees for Late Registration Registration is not complete until the student has enrolled in a program  approved by their adviser and has paid tuition and other fees. A pen -alty fee of $50 is assessed for failure to register within five days of the  scheduled dates. Fees for Late PaymentA $50 late penalty may be charged by the Bursar™s Office for failure to  clear a past-due account at the beginning of instruction.Honor System Matters Monies owed to the Institute resulting from a disciplinary decision may  be collected through the Bursar™s Office, at the request of the dean of  students.Special Fees Students taking the Summer Field Geology course (Ge 120 ab) should consult with the division about travel and subsistence arrangements and costs.Unpaid Bills All bills owed the Institute must be paid when due. Any student whose bills are past due may be refused registration for the following term.  All undergraduate students with an outstanding bursar™s bill balance  of $300 or more will have a hold placed on their registration for the  subsequent term the day before online registration opens. The hold will  be released once students have paid their bill at the Bursar™s Office.  Diplomas will not be released until the bursar account is paid in full.  Undergraduate Expenses 214Caltech ID Card Charges If an undergraduate student owes more than $300, the student™s ID  card will be deactivated and they will be unable to charge any new pur -chases. Cards will be reactivated once students have paid their bill in  full at the Bursar™s Office. FINANCIAL AIDCaltech believes that qualified students who wish to attend the Institute  should not be prevented from doing so for financial reasons. Although the  Institute expects students and families to finance the cost of education  to the fullest extent possible, the Institute will make every effort to assist  those who need help, including those whose financial circumstances  change during the year. Demonstrated financial need is the difference between the annual  cost of attending Caltech and the amount the student and parents can  reasonably be expected to contribute toward those costs. Costs include  actual tuition, student fees, room and board, books and supplies, and per -sonal expenses. For U.S. citizens or eligible noncitizens who reside in the  United States, Canada, Mexico, or Guam, costs include a travel allowance  designed to (partially) offset the cost (airfare) of two round-trips from a  student™s home during the academic year. Caltech™s estimate of a family™s  ability to contribute is determined annually in accordance with nationally  established guidelines.Eligibility for each type of assistance varies, depending upon the source  of funds. Assistance offered by Caltech includes federal, state, and insti -tutional grants, subsidized part-time jobs, and low-interest loans. U.S. cit -izens or eligible noncitizens (as defined in the Free Application for Federal  Student Aid [FAFSA]) may apply for state and federally funded programs.  International students may apply for institutionally funded programs. Students should not wait to be accepted for admission to Caltech  before applying for financial aid. With the exception of international stu -dents, applications for admission are evaluated separately from requests  for financial aid. Students with complete financial aid applications on file  will be considered for all applicable types of need-based assistance. A  renewal application must be submitted each year. In addition to direct  financial assistance, information is available, upon request, about educa -tion payment plans and financial-planning resources. (For information on  non-need-based scholarships and prizes, starting on page 230.)All students who believe they will need assistance to attend Caltech are encouraged to submit financial aid applications. The final day to  complete a financial aid application or request a loan is one day after  the beginning of the registration period for the term following your last  term of enrollment for the year. Please use the table below to determine  which deadline applies to you.Undergraduate Information 215Last Term of Enrollment in  Academic Year 2021-22 Hard Deadline Fall Term November 19, 2021Winter Term February 25, 2022Spring Term May 20, 2022The Financial Aid Office staff is happy to talk with students and  their families at any time to explain the application process, Caltech™s  computations, and available programs. For further information on the  determination of financial need and on application procedures, as well  as on financial aid awards and programs, contact the Financial Aid  Office, California Institute of Technology, Mail Code 20-90, Pasadena,  CA 91125; call (626) 395-6280; or visit the Caltech Financial Aid Office  website at finaid.caltech.edu.HOW TO APPLY FOR FINANCIAL AID  Application Process for Caltech and Federal Financial Aid for  Entering Students (U.S. Citizens and Eligible Noncitizens) Slightly different procedures and deadlines exist for each category of  students applying for financial aid. Detailed descriptions of these pro -cedures and priority due dates for prospective and continuing students  may be found on the Caltech Financial Aid Office website at  finaid.caltech.edu.International Applicants If you are applying for admission as a freshman for the fall of 2022 and  are not a citizen or permanent resident of the United States at the time  of your application for admission, you will need to refer to the Caltech  Financial Aid Office website at  finaid.caltech.edu for instructions for applying for financial aid. International applicants who do not apply for  financial aid by published deadlines, or who are denied aid for their first  year at Caltech, are not eligible for need-based financial aid for any  other academic period while they are undergraduates at the Institute  (with the exception of citizens of Canada and Mexico). Those with financial aid offers will be eligible to apply for assistance in subsequent  years. All eligible students must reapply for aid each year. International students are required to complete the CSS/Financial  Aid PROFILE. This online application collects family income and asset information from international students. Students will need to complete  and submit the CSS PROFILE online at cssprofile.collegeboard.org/ after they have been admitted into Caltech.   (Students can also visit EducationUSA Advising Centers at educationusa.state.gov/find-advising-center if you need assistance  completing your CSS PROFILE.) Please refer to the complete applica -tion instructions provided on the Caltech Financial Aid Office website at  finaid.caltech.edu.Financial Aid216TYPES OF AID AVAILABLE There are three basic categories of financial aid that may be awarded. 1. Grants and scholarships represent ﬂgift aid,ﬂ which does not need  to be repaid. In general, a Caltech scholarship is awarded based  on financial need. Caltech named and/or endowed scholarships  are considered to be based on need and merit. If you qualify for a  state or federal grant, this grant will be included in your financial  aid package.2. Federal Work-Study or Caltech Work-Study represents student  employment funds that have been allocated for you to earn  during the academic year. Summer Caltech Work-Study rep -resents funds that have been allocated for you to earn during  the summer. While a work-study award is not a guarantee of  employment, Caltech generally has more opportunities for stu -dent employment than it has students interested in working. 3. Low-interest educational loans: Students are generally offered  Caltech/Institute loans. Students may be awarded Federal Direct  Stafford Loans if they request them.  CALTECH SCHOLARSHIPS Awarded to students with demonstrated financial need. Recipients  are expected to be enrolled full-time. The named and/or endowed  scholarships are also need-based, but many have a merit component.  Recipients of named and/or endowed scholarships are often selected  after their initial financial aid offer based on scholarship-specific eligi -bility. These scholarships are almost always used to replace some or all  of the recipient™s Caltech scholarship. The Financial Aid Office makes  every attempt to renew these scholarships, contingent upon the recip -ients continuing to meet the specific eligibility criteria. FEDERAL GRANTS Federal Pell GrantAwarded to exceptionally needy undergraduate students who are seeking  their first bachelor™s degree. Amounts are set by the federal government  based on need and enrollment status. In 2021-22, awards ranged from  $650 to $6,495 for full-time students; awards for part-time students are  set in proportion to their enrollment, i.e., three-quarter time, half-time, less  than half-time. Recipients must be in good academic standing.Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity GrantAwarded to undergraduates with demonstrated need who are seeking  their first bachelor™s degree. Priority goes to full-time Pell Grant recip -ients. Recipients must be in good academic standing. Awards cannot  exceed $4,000 per year. STATE GRANTS Cal Grant AProvides tuition and fee assistance to undergraduate California resi -Undergraduate Information 217dents seeking their first bachelor™s degree. Awarded on the basis of  cumulative grade-point average and financial need. Qualifying students can receive up to $9,220, renewable for up to four years. Continuing  Cal Grant recipients must maintain good academic standing in addition  to financial need. They are not required to resubmit verification of their  grade-point average for renewal. Cal Grant BProvides a living-allowance stipend and tuition/fee assistance to under -graduate California residents seeking their first bachelor™s degree.  Awards are based on cumulative grade-point average and high financial  need. Recipients are generally from disadvantaged economic or educa -tional backgrounds. Awards for first-year students provide up to $1,648  for books and living expenses. When renewed or applied beyond  the first year, awards also include tuition and fee assistance of up to  $9,220. Continuing Cal Grant recipients must maintain good academic  standing in addition to financial need. They are not required to resubmit  verification of their grade-point averages for renewal. Other State GrantsOther states, such as Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Rhode Island, may  offer grant assistance to their residents who plan to attend Caltech.  Students are encouraged to contact their respective state post-second -ary agencies for specific eligibility and renewal criteria EDUCATIONAL LOANS An educational loan is a serious financial obligation and must be repaid.  You should carefully consider the repayment obligation before you  accept educational loans. Loans can be an invaluable resource for many  students and their families in financing a college education. Students can  postpone paying a portion of their educational costs until they complete  their education or leave school. The repayment period on most loans can  extend up to 10 years after graduation or leaving school.Graduating with educational debt is a fairly common experience for  students. At Caltech, however, the average educational indebtedness at  graduation is significantly lower than the national average for students  attending four-year private and public colleges. Over the last several  years, the average for Caltech graduates has been among the lowest in  the nation for four-year colleges. The William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program This program offers eligible students and parents the opportunity to bor -row money directly from the federal government to help pay the cost of  attendance at Caltech. The U.S. Department of Education makes loans,  through Caltech, directly to students and/or parents. The Institute will  use the loan(s) to pay your tuition/fees and other direct charges such as  room and board, and give the student any remaining money for indirect  costs. Students and/or parents make their repayments directly to the  federal government. Financial Aid218Direct loans include1. The Federal Direct Stafford Loan Program; 2. The Federal Direct Parent PLUS Loan Program; 3. The Federal Direct Graduate PLUS Loan Program; and 4. The Federal Direct Consolidation Loan Program.  Federal Direct Stafford LoanThere are two types of Federal Direct Stafford Loans: subsidized and  unsubsidized. The federal government pays the interest on subsidized  loans while the borrower is enrolled at least half-time and during autho -rized periods of deferment. The interest on unsubsidized loans begins  to accrue immediately upon disbursement and is generally capitalized  (added to the amount borrowed) when the borrower is no longer enrolled  at least half-time.     Eligibility for subsidized Stafford Loans is based on financial need  as demonstrated by the FAFSA. Students who do not demonstrate suf -ficient need or whose need is met may borrow unsubsidized Stafford  Loans provided their total financial aid, including the Stafford Loan, does  not exceed the total estimated cost of attendance.     Dependent undergraduate students (excluding students whose  parents cannot borrow Parent PLUS loans) may borrow Stafford Loan  amounts not to exceed an annual total of$5,500 for first-year students, with no more than $3,500 in   subsidized Stafford; $6,500 for second-year students, with no more than $4,500 in  subsidized Stafford; and $7,500 for third- and fourth-year students, with no more than  $5,500 in subsidized Stafford.      Independent undergraduate students and dependent undergrad -uate students whose parents are unable to borrow Parent PLUS loans  may borrow additional unsubsidized Stafford Loan amounts not to  exceed an annual total of$9,500 for first-year students, with no more than $3,500 in   subsidized Stafford; $10,500 for second-year students, with no more than $4,500 in  subsidized Stafford; and $12,500 for third- and fourth-year students, with no more than  $5,500 in subsidized Stafford.      Graduate students may borrow Stafford Loan unsubsidized  amounts not to exceed an annual total of $20,500.     The maximum outstanding total subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford Loan debt is $31,000 for dependent undergraduate students, with no more  than $23,000 in subsidized Stafford; $57,500 for independent undergraduate students (or for depen -dent undergraduate students whose parents do not qualify  for PLUS loans), with no more than $23,000 of this aggregate  amount in the form of subsidized loans; and$138,500 for graduate students (including loans for undergrad -uate study), with no more than $65,500 of this aggregate in the  form of subsidized loans. Undergraduate Information 219Stafford Loan interest ratesThe interest rate on subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford Loans dis -bursed for enrollment periods that begin after July 1, 2021 is currently  scheduled to be fixed at 3.73% for undergraduate students. Undergraduate students: Enrollment Periods Beginning BetweenInterest Rates SubsidizedUnsubsidized     July 1, 2021 - June 30, 20223.73%3.73%    July 1, 2020 - June 30, 20212.75%2.75%July 1, 2019 - June 30, 20204.53%4.53%July 1, 2018 - June 30, 20195.05%5.05%July 1, 2017 - June 30, 20184.45%4.45%July 1, 2016 - June 30, 20173.76%3.76% July 1, 2015 - June 30, 20164.29%4.29%July 1, 2014 - June 30, 20154.66%4.66%July 1, 2013 - June 30, 20143.86%3.86%July 1, 2011 - June 30, 20133.40%6.80%July 1, 2010 - June 30, 20114.50%6.80%July 1, 2009 - June 30, 20105.60%6.80%July 1, 2008 - June 30, 20096.00%6.80%Graduate students:Enrollment Periods Beginning BetweenInterest Rates UnsubsidizedJuly 1, 2021 Œ June 30, 20225.28%July 1, 2020 Œ June 30, 20214.30%July 1, 2019 Œ June 30, 20206.08%July 1, 2018 Œ June 30, 20196.60%July 1, 2017 Œ June 30, 20186.00%July 1, 2016 - June 30, 20175.31%July 1, 2015 - June 30, 20165.84%July 1, 2014 - June 30, 20156.21%Financial Aid220July 1, 2013 - June 30, 20145.41%July 1, 2006 - June 30, 20136.80% To offset the federal government™s cost of the program, the borrower  must pay an up-front origination fee of the principal amount of the loan. First Disbursement Made Loan FeeOctober 1, 2020 Œ September 30, 20221.057%October 1, 2019 Œ September 30, 20201.059%October 1, 2018 Œ September 30, 20191.062%October 1, 2017 Œ September 30, 20181.066%October 1, 2016 Œ September 30, 20171.069%October 1, 2015 Œ September 30, 20161.068%October 1, 2014 Œ September 30, 20151.073%December 1, 2013 Œ September 30, 20141.072%July 1, 2013 Œ November 30, 20131.051%The maximum repayment period under this program is 10 years, not  including authorized periods of deferment. Direct Stafford Loans have a  six-month grace period that starts the day after the borrower graduates,  leaves school, or drops below half-time enrollment. Repayment begins  when the grace period ends. Deferments are available for new borrowers  during at least half-time enrollment at an eligible institution; during periods  of academic study in approved graduate fellowship or rehabilitation pro -grams; and for periods of unemployment and economic hardship. Applications for Federal Direct Stafford Loans are available on the  Caltech Financial Aid Office website. Complete information on Stafford  Loan deferments and repayment options is also available from the  Financial Aid Office. FEDERAL PARENT PLUS LOAN Parent PLUS loans are available to the parents or stepparents of depen -dent undergraduate students. These credit-based loans are not based on  federal need or subsidized by the government, but students must file a  FAFSA in order for their parents to qualify for a Parent PLUS loan.   Enrollment Periods Beginning BetweenInterest Rates UnsubsidizedJuly 1, 2021 Œ June 30, 20226.28%July 1, 2020 Œ June 30, 20215.30%July 1, 2019 Œ June 30, 20207.08%122Undergraduate Information 220221July 1, 2018 - June 30, 20197.60%July 1, 2017 - June 30, 20187.00%July 1, 2016 - June 30, 20176.31%July 1, 2015 - June 30, 20166.84%July 1, 2014 - June 30, 20157.21%July 1, 2013 - June 30, 20146.41%July 1, 2006 - June 30, 20137.90%Interest is charged on Direct Parent PLUS loans during all periods,  beginning on the date of the loan™s first disbursement. There is no  annual limit to the amount that can be borrowed through the Parent  PLUS loan program. In general, parents may borrow the difference  between the cost of the student™s education and any other financial  aid received. PLUS loans may also be used to pay for all or part of the  expected family contribution. In addition to the interest, parents pay a  loan fee.First Disbursement Made Loan FeeOctober 1, 2020 Œ September 30, 20224.228%October 1, 2019 Œ September 30, 20204.236%October 1, 2018 Œ September 30, 20194.248%October 1, 2017 Œ September 30, 20184.264%October 1, 2016 Œ September 30, 20174.276%October 1, 2015 Œ September 30, 20164.272%October 1, 2014 Œ September 30, 20154.292%December 1, 2013 Œ September 30, 20144.288%July 1, 2013 Œ November 30, 20134.204%For Parent PLUS loans that are first disbursed on or after July 1,  2008, parent borrowers have the option of deferring repayment based  on the enrollment status of the dependent student on whose behalf a  Direct PLUS loan was obtained. Specifically, Parent PLUS loan bor -rowers may defer repayment while the dependent student on whose  behalf the loan was obtained is enrolled on at least a half-time basis,  and during the six-month period after the dependent student on whose behalf the loan was obtained ceases to be enrolled on at least a half- time basis.If a Parent PLUS loan borrower does not request a deferment, the  first payment on the loan will be due within 60 days after the loan is fully disbursed.Applications for Federal Direct Parent PLUS loans are available on the  Caltech Financial Aid Office website. Applications must be submitted to  the Financial Aid Office for eligibility certification. Complete information  123Financial Aid221222on Parent PLUS loan deferments and repayment options is also available  from the Financial Aid Office. Federal Student Aid OmbudsmanThe Federal Student Aid Ombudsman works with student loan bor-rowers to informally resolve loan disputes and problems. The office of  the ombudsman helps borrowers having problems with the following  federal loans: direct loans (subsidized and unsubsidized Direct Stafford  Loans, Direct PLUS loans, and Direct Consolidation Loans); Federal  Family Education Loans (subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford Loans,  FFEL PLUS loans, and FFEL Consolidation Loans); guaranteed student loans, SLS loans, and Federal Perkins Loans. If a student needs the assistance of the ombudsman in order to resolve disputes or prob -lems, they may contact the office at U.S. Department of Education,  FSA Ombudsman Group, P.O. Box 1843, Monticello, KY 42633; (877)  557-2575; fax: (606) 396-4821; visit the website at studentaid.gov/feed-back-center/ to submit a complaint.Caltech LoansGenerally, no interest is charged and no repayment of principal is  required while a student maintains a continuous course of study at  Caltech. Repayment on Caltech loans begins nine months after grad-uation, leaving school, or less than half-time enrollment. Caltech loans  carry an annual interest rate of 5%. More specific information is pro -vided on the promissory note and the disclosure statement provided to  students prior to disbursement of the loan.Other loans/emergency loans may be available to students regardless  of their eligibility for financial aid. These loans are usually payable within  the same academic year and are administered by the dean of students  on a case-by-case basis. Additional information and applications may be  obtained from the dean of students™ office. The Dean™s Office also has a no-interest, 30-day emergency-loan  program. Maximum loans are $500. Additional information and applica -tions may be obtained from the Dean™s Office. STUDENT EMPLOYMENTWork programs provide students with the opportunity to earn money  to help with college expenses while gaining valuable job experience. Student employment opportunities are generally available to all Caltech  students, even those who have not applied for financial aid or qualified for need-based aid. On campus employers are encouraged to post  opportunities through Career Advising and Experiential Learning™s plat -form.Please note that students may work no more than 16 hours per week  (no more than 12 hours per week as undergraduate teaching assistants).  Undergraduate TAs must be in good academic standing (eligible, and not  on probation), and good disciplinary standing (not on disciplinary proba -tion) for the term in which they are serving as a TA, and must be approved  by the undergraduate deans. First-year students may not work during fall  term. Students can expect to earn at least the City of Pasadena minimum  Undergraduate Information 223wage of $15 per hour. Compensation rates will vary based on the position,  a student™s skills, and previous work experience. Additional policies and procedures for teaching assistants, including  undergraduates with teaching responsibilities are included in section 4,  Teaching Assistantships. (See pages 354Œ355.)  Federal Work-Study Awarded to domestic students who have demonstrated financial need  through their submission of the FAFSA, this federally funded program pro -vides part-time employment to eligible students.Most Caltech students are awarded $2,500 in Federal Work-Study  (FWS). Some students may be awarded less. Since entering students are  not permitted to work on-campus in the fall term and can only work in the  winter and spring terms, student employment awards for entering students  are limited to $1,350 in their first year. Employment awards will increase to  the standard student employment amount offered to continuing students  after the first year. The maximum amount of FWS wages that a student  may earn is determined by their financial need. Students have the option  to move all or a portion of their loan or student employment from one  program to the other at any time during the academic year. The final day  to request to convert your loan into work or work into loan is one day after  the beginning of the registration period for the term following your last  term of enrollment for the year. Please use the following table to determine  which deadline applies to you.Last Term of Enrollment in  Academic Year 2021-22 Hard Deadline Fall Term November 19, 2021Winter Term February 25, 2022Spring Term May 20, 2022Please go to the work-study page on the Caltech Financial Aid Office website (finaid.caltech.edu/TypesofAid/workstudy) for additional  information about student employment at Caltech.Caltech Work-Study The Caltech Work-Study Program is funded by the Institute and is  designed to provide part-time employment for international students  who have demonstrated financial need, and other students who do not qualify for the Federal Work-Study Program. The Caltech Work-Study  Program is limited to on-campus employment or student employment  positions at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The program™s regulations  parallel the Federal Work-Study Program™s regulations. FINANCIAL AID WHEN STUDYING ABROAD/AWAY  Caltech provides student financial aid (in the form of grants, schol-arships, and loans) to those undergraduates with demonstrated  financial need who desire to participate in the Institute-sponsored  University of Chicago Study Away Program, Caltech Cambridge  Financial Aid224Scholars Program, Caltech Copenhagen Scholars Program, Caltech  Edinburgh Scholars Program, École Polytechnique Scholars  Program, Caltech London Scholars Program, or Melbourne Scholars  Program. Enrollment in a study-abroad program approved for credit  by Caltech will be considered enrollment at the Institute, for the  purpose of applying for and receiving federal student financial assis-tance. To be eligible for consideration in Caltech™s study-abroad  programs, students must be in good academic standing, as defined  in the Caltech Catalog and as certified by the Institute™s registrar.  They must also meet the minimum GPA requirement as outlined  in the information provided by the Fellowships Advising and Study  Abroad Office. In addition, students selected to be Cambridge,  Copenhagen, École Polytechnique, Melbourne, or University College  London scholars will be provided a memo of understanding outlining  the terms of their study-abroad participation. (For more information  on Study Abroad, see pages 191-197.)Costs include but are not limited to tuition, fees, room, board, addi -tional meals not covered by a board contract, books, supplies, personal  expenses, and a standard transportation allowance from the student™s  home to Caltech. Transportation expenses related to the student™s travel  between Caltech and the study-abroad institution are the responsibil -ity of the student; financial aid recipients may be offered interest-free  Institute loans to cover study-abroad travel expenses. Students will have  their expected family contribution and financial package calculated in the  same manner as other students. Students studying abroad are subject  to the standard Caltech policy of a maximum of 12 terms of eligibility for  financial aid. University of Chicago Study Away Program, Cambridge,  Copenhagen, University College London, École Polytechnique, University  of Edinburgh, and Melbourne University candidates must meet all finan -cial aid priority deadlines and eligibility requirements to receive aid. It  is the student™s responsibility to ensure that all necessary documents  are filed and complete with regard to their application for financial aid.  University of Chicago Study Away Program participants and Cambridge,  Copenhagen, University College London, École Polytechnique, University  of Edinburgh, and University of Melbourne Scholars will continue to be  considered for available federal, state, Caltech grant, scholarship, and  loan funds. The Fellowships Advising and Study Abroad Office will make  the necessary arrangements with the Bursar™s Office to ensure that  scholars who may be eligible for funds in excess of the direct charges to  the Institute receive those funds prior to their departure. OTHER RESOURCESA number of both local and national organizations offer outside schol -arships to continuing students throughout the year, some of these  regardless of need. Those relevant to undergraduate students will also  be posted on the Caltech Financial Aid Office website. Such schol -arships can also often be found with the help of a search service.  We recommend College Board Fund Finder ( bigfuture.collegeboard. org/scholarship-search ); CollegeNet Mach 25 (scholarshipopportu-nity.org/collegenetmach-25/ ); FastWeb ( fastweb.com); Scholarship  Undergraduate Information 225Guidance (scholarshipguidance.com/); Scholarship Opportunities  for Women ( affordablecollegesonline.org/womens-guide-paying-for- college/); Scholarship Opportunities for Minority Students (afforda -blecollegesonline.org/financial-aid-for-minorities/ ); and Scholarship  Search by Sallie Mae ( salliemae.com/college-planning/tools/scholar-ship-search/?dtd_cell=SMPLSHDCOTDOBOOTOTHOTHRR010001 ).  (For more information on scholarship services, go to finaid.org).  You may also visit the Financial Aid website at finaid.caltech.edu/ TypesofAid/OS/list for a list of outside scholarships.   Outside scholarships acquired by students are considered, by fed -eral regulation, to be a resource available during the academic year.  Caltech™s policy is to use outside scholarships to replace the student  employment and/or loan components of the financial aid package. For entering students, we generally replace student employment first. For  continuing students, loans are generally replaced first. Only if the total  outside scholarships exceeds the student employment and/or loan that would have been included in your financial aid package will it be necessary to reduce Caltech scholarship. In general, a student™s total  financial aid, including outside assistance, cannot exceed their demon-strated financial need. Under no circumstances can a student™s total  financial aid, exceed their estimated cost of attendance.FINANCIAL AID DISBURSEMENTMost financial aid funds are credited directly to your student account  and are applied first to institutional charges for the current term. Funds  are credited no earlier than 10 days prior to the first day of the term.  Aid that can be credited directly to your account will be credited when  you have accepted or declined your awards on access.caltech;  provided all required documents for the aid programs you have  been awarded  made satisfactory academic progress; enrolled in at least the minimum number of credits for the finan -cial aid programs you have been awarded;  completed all necessary loan documents and, for first-time Direct Stafford Loan borrowers, completed the online Entrance  Interview. If the disbursement of aid results in a credit balance, any aid award -ed in excess of institutional charges will be paid to the student as a  refund. Refunds must be requested by the account holder. Requests  may be made by e-mail, telephone, or in person at the Bursar™s Office.  Prior to receiving funds, it may be necessary to fill out and sign a  refund form. Refunds can be obtained in cash or by check. A maximum  refund of $500 cash per day can be received from the Bursar™s Office  cashier. Refund checks are requested by the Bursar™s Office and issued  by Accounts Payable. This usually takes five working days from the day  of request. Outside scholarships are usually disbursed in the form of a check  and must be handled according to the sponsor™s specifications. If  the funds are sent to the Financial Aid Office or the Bursar™s Office,  they will be credited to your account. Again, if the crediting of any  outside scholarship results in a credit balance on your account, you  Financial Aid226may request that the credit balance be refunded to you. Federal reg -ulations allow Caltech to credit financial aid funds to your account for  payment of tuition, fees, and room and board charges. You must give  the Bursar™s Office written authorization to keep a credit balance on  your account from one term to the next term during the academic year.  Federal guidelines prohibit keeping a credit balance from one academic  year to the next. If you complete your financial aid file late in the term, resulting in the late disbursement of your financial aid funds, you may  be subject to late fees assessed by the Bursar™s Office. Cal Grant B stipend payments will be credited to your tuition  account unless you contact the Financial Aid Office in person within the  first three weeks of the term to make alternate arrangements. Again,  if the crediting of any financial aid results in a credit balance on your  account, you may request that the credit balance be refunded to you. In general, loans are disbursed in three installments, one at the begin -ning each term. For most Caltech students who are enrolled for the full  academic year, this means that one-third of their loan(s) will be disbursed  at the beginning of the fall term, another at the beginning of the winter  term, and the final third at the beginning of the spring term. Students  whose loan periods are for one term receive their entire disbursement at  the beginning of that term.If you work through either the Federal Work-Study or the Caltech Work- Study program, you will be paid by check through the biweekly Caltech  payroll system. Checks are normally distributed at your actual work site. Since financial aid is generally awarded on the assumption of full- time enrollment, it is possible that some or all of your aid will need to be  adjusted if your enrollment status results in a reduction in your tuition for  a term. If you withdraw or drop below half-time enrollment after the last  day for adding classes for a term, you may be required to repay all or a  portion of the aid that has already been credited to your account. You  must inform the Financial Aid Office if you take a leave of absence or  change your enrollment subsequent to receiving your financial aid. Cal  Grant recipients who take a leave of absence are advised to contact the  California Student Aid Commission (csac.ca.gov) and submit a form to  remain eligible for the program. You have the right to cancel your loan(s) any time before disburse -ment and up to 14 days after disbursement.    SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS (SAP) Federal and state regulations governing student financial aid programs  require the Institute to ensure that each student who is receiving finan -cial aid maintains Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) toward their  degree. The SAP check occurs after grades are posted at the end of each  term. Failure to meet the standards of satisfactory academic progress  may disqualify a student from additional federal, state and institutional  financial aid. A student can appeal their unsatisfactory academic prog -ress status and be placed on warning, probation or continued on pro -bation for financial aid purposes.Undergraduate Information 227Satisfactory Academic Progress Requirements Following the first two terms, which are taken on a pass-fail basis,  freshmen will be ineligible to register if they failed to pass at least  27 units in the previous term. After the first two terms of study, all  undergraduate students must complete a minimum of 27 units with a  grade-point average of at least 1.9 in order to remain eligible to regis -ter for classes. In addition, students must earn an average of 36 units  per term over the past three trailing terms (that is, a minimum of 108  units should be earned after three terms of enrollment each academic  year). A student may be excused from the 27-unit eligibility requirement  if the requisite petition has been approved, prior to Add Day, by the  dean or associate dean of undergraduate students. Under exceptional  circumstances the deans may waive the requirement that such a petition  be approved prior to Add Day, but may do so only once during that stu -dent™s career at Caltech.  Following their first ineligibility, students are to meet with the dean  or associate dean of undergraduate students. The dean may choose  to reinstate them, in which case they will be on academic probation.  Alternatively, the dean may direct them to petition the Undergraduate  Academic Standards and Honors Committee (UASH) for reinstatement.  UASH will either approve their petition for reinstatement and place them  on academic probation, or require them to withdraw from the Institute for  at least two terms. Students who fail a core course or who fail to suc -cessfully complete 36 units, even though they remain in good standing,  are required to meet with one of the undergraduate deans before being  allowed to register for classes in the subsequent term. Financial Aid Warning Students who are found not to be making satisfactory academic prog -ress at the end of an academic term will be placed on financial aid warn -ing. A student may continue to receive financial aid for one term while  on financial aid warning status. Students should use this opportunity to  re-establish SAP. Financial Aid Probation Students who fail to make satisfactory academic progress after their  term of financial aid warning will be ineligible to register and ineligible for  financial aid. Students may appeal this status as outlined in the Caltech  Catalog. Ineligible freshmen must petition the UASH Committee for rein -statement if they wish to continue as students and continue to receive  financial aid. The dean of students or associate dean may act on a peti-tion if it is the student™s first ineligibility.  Undergraduate students, except first- and second-term freshmen, may  submit a petition to the UASH Committee for reinstatement, giving any  reasons that may exist for their previous unsatisfactory work and stating  any new conditions that may lead to better results. Each such petition will  be considered on its merits. For the first such ineligibility, the petition may  be acted on by the dean of undergraduate students, after consultation  with the student and examination of the record. At the dean™s discretion,  such cases may be referred to the UASH Committee for action. All subse -quent reinstatements must be acted upon by the Committee. Financial Aid228Undergraduate Information Students who are reinstated as a result of their appeal/petition for  reinstatement will be placed on financial aid probation and may receive  financial aid for an additional academic term.Continued on Financial Aid Probation Students who fail to make satisfactory academic progress after a term  on financial aid probation will be ineligible to register and ineligible for  federal and state financial aid. These students may appeal this status as outlined above and in the Caltech Catalog.Students who are reinstated as a result of their appeal/petition for  reinstatement will be continued on financial aid probation. These stu -dents will be ineligible for federal and state aid. They will continue to be eligible for up to three additional terms of institutional aid but their  scholarship eligibility will be reduced in each term the student is contin -ued on financial aid probation. Financial Aid SuspensionStudents who fail to make satisfactory academic progress after being con -tinued on financial aid probation for three additional terms will be ineligible  for federal, state and institutional financial aid, even if they are subsequent -ly reinstated by the UASH Committee, until such time as they make satis -factory academic progress. Maximum Time Frame for Receiving AidA student has a limited time frame to complete all degree requirements  and remain eligible for financial aid. As defined by federal regulations,  the maximum time frame is 150 percent of the published program  length for degree completion.  To qualify for a Bachelor of Science degree, students must com -plete a minimum of 486 units  486 x 150% = 729 maximum attempt-ed units. An ﬂattemptedﬂ unit is defined as any unit that a student remains  enrolled in AFTER the Add Period, including units the student with -draws from each term. Units that a student is retroactively enrolled in  after the Add Period are considered attempted units. CLASS LEVEL FOR FINANCIAL AID PURPOSESUndergraduate students are classified according to the number of units earned and the number of terms in residence at Caltech. Both these criteria must be satisfied for class-level eligibility. Students are regarded as freshmen until eligible for sophomore status, and as sophomores, juniors, or seniors if they meet the corresponding criteria set below. Units earned are defined as units completed with a passing grade.229Classification Minimum Units Earned  Minimum Terms  in ResidenceSophomore 1083Junior2166Senior3249PART-TIME ENROLLMENT (UNDERLOADS) The Institute will charge students for a minimum of 12 terms of full-time  tuition, or the prorated equivalent based on their classification at the  time they begin their enrollment, even if they complete their degree  requirements early. Undergraduate students who underload in a term  will be charged full-time tuition but their financial aid, including outside  scholarships, will be adjusted as indicated below based on the actual number of units students are enrolled in as of Add Day. Students may  NOT receive scholarship assistance for any term in which they are not  enrolled at least half-time. Underloads and Financial Aid: The Impact of Less than Full-time Enrollment Any student who wishes to carry fewer than 36 units in any given term  must petition for an underload. Underloads must be approved by the  Dean or Associate Dean of Undergraduate Students. Underloads for  graduating seniors must be approved by the Registrar. (See Caltech  Catalog, page 212, for the underload policy.) The following information summarizes the impact of less than full-time enrollment on financial aid. See page 208 for the separate condi -tions regarding eligibility to be enrolled less than full-time.  3/4 TimeFull-time enrollment is defined in the Caltech Catalog as 36 units.  Students enrolling less than full-time, taking between 27 to 35 units, are  considered enrolled 3/4 time. The impact to their financial aid is usually  a reduction to their grant, in the same amount as the reduction in their  tuition. Federal Pell Grant recipients will have their Federal Pell award  reduced according to federal regulations. The Financial Aid Office will  revise the student™s budget to reflect the calculated per-unit tuition and  then revise the student™s aid (grant eligibility) to reflect the reduction in  calculated need. 1/2 TimeHalf-time enrollment is defined as enrolling in 18 to 26 units. In this  situation, the Financial Aid Office will revise the budget for financial aid  purposes to reflect the calculated per-unit tuition and reduce the books  and supplies allowance to 1/2 of the standard amount for that term.  Federal Pell Grant recipients will have their Pell award reduced accord -ing to federal regulations. The Financial Aid Office will revise the stu -dent™s budget to reflect the per-unit tuition and other reductions in edu -Financial Aid230cation related costs and then revise the student™s aid (grant eligibility) to  reflect the reduction in calculated need. Students enrolled 1/2 time can  also anticipate an increase in their work-study award for the term. Less than 1/2 TimeLess than 1/2 time enrollment is defined as taking fewer than 18 units.  Tuition is revised for financial aid purposes to reflect the calculated  per-unit tuition and the books and supplies allowance is reduced  to 1/4 of the standard allowance for that term. (As indicated in the  Caltech Catalog, the minimum tuition charge is units per term.) The  student™s aid is revised based on the reduced education related  costs. Federal Pell Grant recipients will have their Pell award reduced  according to federal regulations. More importantly, the student/family  becomes ineligible for scholarship/grant aid awarded by Caltech and  for Federal Direct PLUS or Stafford loans for that term. The student  will is only eligible for Caltech work-study and loan assistance. Please note: If the student is enrolled less than half time, the grace  period on any student loan (Federal Perkins Loan, Federal Direct  Stafford Loan and Caltech and Institute loans) will begin.  Effect on Outside Scholarships In all of the above categories, the Financial Aid Office also checks to  see if a student has an outside scholarship that requires continuous full- time enrollment. If a scholarship donor requires full time enrollment, the  Financial Aid Office is required to return the scholarship money for that  term to the donor. If this occurs, the student is encouraged to contact the  donor directly to review and, possibly, appeal the agency™s policy.  QuestionsStudents with questions regarding underloads should discuss their  individual circumstances with a financial aid administrator. Contact the  office Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., with any questions  you have. PRIZES AND AWARDS Advocating Change Together (ACT) Award  Given by the Caltech Y, this award allows students to learn about a  global, national, or local issue by immersing themselves with activists working on a cause over the summer and then challenges them to edu-cate others by creating and leading programs designed to raise aware -ness on campus the following year. Robert P. Balles Caltech Mathematics Scholars Award   This award is given to the mathematics major finishing their senior year  who has demonstrated the most outstanding performance in mathe-matics courses completed in the student's time at Caltech.  Undergraduate Information 231Mabel Beckman Prize   Given in memory of Mabel Beckman™s many years of commitment to  Caltech™s educational and research programs, this prize is awarded  to an undergraduate woman (or women) who, upon completion of her  junior or senior year at Caltech, has achieved academic excellence and demonstrated outstanding leadership skills, a commitment to personal excellence, good character, and a strong interest in the Caltech com -munity. Eric Temple Bell Undergraduate Mathematics Research Prize  This prize is given to one or more juniors or seniors for outstanding  original research in mathematics. Bhansali Prize in Computer Science Established in 2001 by Vineer Bhansali (B.S. ™87, M.S. ™87) in memory  of his grandfather, Mag Raj Bhansali, this prize is given to an under -graduate student for outstanding research in computer science in the  current academic year. Awardees are selected by a committee of com -puter science faculty. Amasa Bishop Summer Study Abroad Prize This prize is given to one or more freshmen, sophomores, or juniors  to fund summer study abroad in an organized program with the aim of  gaining exposure to foreign language and international issues or cul -tures, including global issues in the sciences and engineering. Richard G. Brewer Prize in Physics   This prize recognizes a freshman with the most interesting solutions to  the Physics 11 ﬁhurdles,ﬂ demonstrating intellectual promise and cre -ativity at the very beginning of their Caltech education.Fritz B. Burns Prize in Geology   This prize is given to an undergraduate who has demonstrated both  academic excellence and great promise of future contributions in  the fields represented by the Division of Geological and Planetary  Sciences.Caltech Alumni Association Spirit Award  Commemorating extraordinary activities by Caltech undergraduate  students, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars who best exemplify the spirit, tradition, and values of Caltech, this award is given  only when the Alumni Association finds that exceptional activities have occurred that merit this special recognition. Bonnie Cashin Prize for Imaginative Thinking Awarded annually, this prize is given to the entering freshman who  wrote the most imaginative essays in the application for their freshman  admission.Ian Campbell Award  The Ian Campbell Award is for outstanding performance in field geolo -gy courses during this academic year. Prizes and Awards 232Robert F. Christy Prize for an Outstanding Freshman in Physics  This prize is awarded annually to a freshman who has demonstrated  excellence in physics. Established in 2018, this prize honors the mem-ory of Robert F. Christy, former provost and professor of theoretical  physics at Caltech. Robert F. Christy Prize for an Outstanding Senior in Theoretical Physics  This prize is awarded annually to a senior who has demonstrated  excellence in theoretical physics through research and/or coursework.  Established in 2018, this prize honors the memory of Robert F. Christy,  former provost and professor of theoretical physics at Caltech. Donald S. Clark Memorial Awards   This award is given to two juniors in recognition of service to the cam -pus community and academic excellence. Preference is given to stu -dents in the Division of Engineering and Applied Science and to those in chemical engineering. The awards honor the work of Professor Clark,  class of 1929, both in the field of engineering and in his service to the Alumni Association.Dr. William "Bil" Clemons, Jr. Agent of Change Award  This award is given to individuals embodying servant leadership  through a demonstrated commitment to steering social change within  the Caltech community, taking initiative and having the vision to trans -late a need into actionable steps to create legacy and a more inclusive  campus climate, engage in advocacy and organize efforts with clear  deliverables.CMS and IST Gradient for Change Award  The CMS and IST Gradient for Change Awards honor students, post -docs, staff, and faculty in the Caltech community who demonstrate  exceptional efforts to make Caltech and/or the broader scientific  community a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment. The  awards recognize and highlight individual contributors or small teams  who are considered agents of change, community leaders, and/or allies  to historically marginalized group(s) in the information sciences, includ -ing computer science, applied mathematics, and beyond.COMPASS CMP Outstanding Mentor Award  This award recognizes individuals who demonstrated a willingness  to share their knowledge to enhance the professional and personal  development of their mentee(s), provided emotional and moral support  and encouragement, enhanced or helped facilitate integration into the Caltech community, while providing access to career related informa -tion and exposure to various professional resources, opportunities,  networks, and other role models, promoted the mentee™s sense of  competence, confidence, and belonging.COMPASS CMP Outstanding Mentee Award  This award recognizes individuals who demonstrated a sincere desire  to succeed as a student and is committed to their personal devel-opment, open and willing to learn from their mentor and receptive to  Undergraduate Information 233advice and counsel, worked with their mentor to establish realistic  goals and demonstrated a commitment to carrying them out.Deans™ Cup   This award is presented to undergraduates whose concern for their  fellow students has been demonstrated by their persistent efforts to  improve the quality of undergraduate life and by effective communica -tion with members of the faculty and administration.EAS New Horizons Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Award  This award recognizes and honors individuals within the EAS communi -ty who have actively contributed to the Divi-sion™s goal to be a diverse,  equitable and inclusive engineering community. Doris Everhart Service Award   This award is given annually to an undergraduate who has actively  supported and willingly worked for organizations that enrich not only  student life, but also the campus and/or the community as a whole, and who has, in addition, exhibited care and concern for the welfare of  students on a personal basis. The award was established in 1999 by  Martin and Sally Ridge in honor of Doris Everhart.Richard P. Feynman Prize in Theoretical Physics   This prize is awarded to a senior on the basis of excellence in theoreti -cal physics. Haren Lee Fisher Memorial Award in Junior Physics   This recognizes a junior physics major who demonstrates the greatest  promise of future contributions in physics. Henry Ford II Scholar Awards   This award recognizes either the engineering students with the best  academic record at the end of the third year of undergraduate study or  the engineering students with the best first-year record in the graduate  program. Jack E. Froehlich Memorial Award   This award, established by the family and friends of the late Jack E.  Froehlich (B.S. ™47, M.S. ™48, Ph.D. ™50), who did his undergraduate  and graduate work at Caltech and was later the project manager for  Explorer I for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provides an award to one  or two juniors in the upper 5 percent of their class who show out -standing promise for a creative professional career. The recipients are  selected by the deans and the Undergraduate Academic Standards  and Honors Committee.Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship This prize, awarded annually, recognizes an undergraduate student  in any class for original research, an original paper or essay, or other  evidence of creative scholarship beyond the normal requirements  of specific courses. The student is selected by the deans and the Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee. Prizes and Awards 234George W. and Bernice E. Green Memorial Prize   This prize, awarded annually, recognizes an undergraduate student  in any class for original research, an original paper or essay, or other  evidence of creative scholarship beyond the normal requirements  of specific courses. The student is selected by the deans and the Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee. David M. Grether Prize in Social Science The prize rewards outstanding performance and creativity by a Caltech  undergraduate who completes one of the social science options. The  prize was established by Susan G. Davis in recognition of David M.  Grether™s contributions to econometrics and experimental economics  and his service to the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences. The prize is awarded annually by a committee of social science faculty. Lucy Guernsey Service Award  This award is awarded to one or two students who have provid -ed exceptional service to the Caltech Y and/or the community, are  involved with service projects, have demonstrated leadership in com -munity and volunteer service efforts, and exemplify a spirit of service. Frederic W. Hinrichs, Jr., Memorial Award   This award, established by the Board of Trustees, is in memory of  Frederick W. Hinrichs, Jr., who served for more than 20 years as dean  and professor at Caltech. In remembrance of his honor, courage, and  kindness, the annual award is given to the senior (or seniors) who,  throughout their undergraduate years, made the greatest contribution  to the student body and whose qualities of character, leadership, and  responsibility have been outstanding. At the discretion of the dean,  more than one award may be made in any year. Alexander P. and Adelaide F. Hixon Prize for Writing  The Hixon Prize for Writing was established in 2000 by Alexander P.  and Adelaide F. Hixon. The prize will be awarded annually to an under -graduate student for the best composition in a freshman humanities  course. The prize is administered by the writing center, and the winner  will be chosen by a committee from the humanities division.  The George W. Housner Prize for Academic Excellence and Original  Research This prize is given annually to a senior or seniors in the upper 20 percent of their class who have demonstrated excellence in schol -arship and in the preparation of an outstanding piece of original  scientific research. The students are selected by the deans and the  Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee. At the  discretion of the deans, more than one award may be given in any year.  This prize is made possible by a gift from the late George W. Housner,  Carl F Braun Professor of Engineering, Emeritus. Patrick Hummel and Harry Gray Travel Fund  Established as a joint gift from Carla and Paul Hummel, Patrick  Hummel, and Shirley and Harry Gray, Caltech™s Arnold O. Beckman  Professor of Chemistry and founding director of the Beckman Institute,  Undergraduate Information 235the endowed fund supports undergraduate travel opportunities that  promote professional and leadership development and broaden stu -dents™ perspectives as engaged, responsible citizens of the world. This  fund is administered by the Caltech Y. Bibi Jentoft-Nilsen Memorial Award   Family and friends of Bibi Jentoft-Nilsen, class of 1989, have provided  this award in her memory. This award recognizes a junior or senior who  exhibits outstanding qualities of leadership and who actively contrib-utes to the quality of student life at Caltech.Scott Russell Johnson Undergraduate Mathematics Prize This prize recognizes the best graduating mathematics student. Special  consideration is given to independent research done as a senior thesis  or SURF project. Dr. James King Jr. Student Diversity Award  The Dr. James King Jr. award is given to individuals who stand out as  strong supporters of diversity within the Caltech student body. Dr. King  is the first African American to receive a Ph.D. from Caltech in chemi -cal physics (at that time it was chemistry and physics). Along with his many accomplishments as a scientist and the Assistant Laboratory Director at JPL, he had a reputation for mentoring students and  encouraged diversity in the Caltech student body. D. S. Kothari Prize in Physics This prize is awarded to a graduating senior in physics who has pro -duced an outstanding research project during the year. Margie Lauritsen Leighton Prize   This prize is awarded to one or two undergraduate women who are  majoring in physics or astrophysics, and who have demonstrated aca -demic excellence.Senior Undergraduate Thesis Prize This prize recognizes senior theses that exemplify research and the  effective use of the scholarly record.  It is awarded by the Caltech  Library and the Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors  Committee. Winners receive a honorarium and recognition in Caltech™s  commencement program.  The honorarium for the winner is made pos -sible by the Friends of the Caltech Library. Mari Peterson Ligocki ™81 Memorial Award  This award is given to a student who has improved the quality of stu -dent life at Caltech through their personal character. It recognizes the  student who provides quiet support and kind encouragement to peers.  This fund was established by Mr. Jose F. Helu Jr. (B.S. '79) to honor the  memory of Mari Peterson Ligocki, who possessed these qualities. Gordon McClure Memorial Communications Prize This prize is awarded to undergraduate students for excellence in writ -ten and oral communication skills. Awards will be given in the following  fields: English, history, and philosophy. Prizes and Awards 236Mary A. Earl McKinney Prize in Literature   The Mary A. Earl McKinney Prize in Literature was established in 1946  by Samuel P. McKinney, M.D., of Los Angeles. Its purpose is to pro -mote proficiency in writing. The terms under which it is given are decid -ed each year by the literature faculty. It may be awarded for essays  submitted in connection with regular literature classes or awarded on  the basis of a special essay contest.Mechanical Engineering Award  This award recognizes a B.S. candidate in mechanical engineering  whose academic performance has demonstrated outstanding original thinking and creativity, as judged by a faculty committee appointed  each year by the executive officer for mechanical engineering. Merck Index Award  This award is given to one or more graduating students who have  demonstrated outstanding achievement in the field of chemistry. James Michelin Scholarship Given in memory of geologist James Michelin, who worked in the oil fields  of Southern California in the 1930s and dreamed of returning to college at  Caltech, this annual prize recognizes one or more undergraduate students  for their contributions to the field of geology or geophysics.Robert L. Noland Leadership Award   This award is given to one or more undergraduate students who exhibit  qualities of outstanding leadership, which are most often expressed as  personal actions that have helped other people and that have inspired  others to fulfill their capabilities. The scholarship was set up by Ametek in 1978 in honor of its president, Robert L. Noland, a Caltech alumnus. Rodman W. Paul History Prize   This prize recognizes a junior or senior who has displayed an unusual  interest in and talent for history. Howard Reynolds Memorial Prize in Geology   This prize is awarded to a sophomore or junior who demonstrates the  potential to excel in the field of geology and who actively contributes to the quality of Caltech student life.Residential Experience Leadership Award  This award recognizes leaders who made a significant impact on  Caltech students™ lives during their collective four-year Caltech career  and/or during a particularly difficult situation or circumstance, like  COVID-19.Residential Experience Team Award  A leadership team that has had a positive impact on Caltech, including leading a program or event, during the last academic year. Undergraduate Information 237Herbert J. Ryser Scholarships   This scholarship is awarded to undergraduate students for academic  excellence, preferably in mathematics. Sarah Sam Activist Scholar Award  This award is given to individuals who demonstrated excellence within  their discipline and research, while engaging complex social justice  issues. Led and/or participated in advocacy campaigns centering the experiences of minoritized identities, provided vision and leadership in  the formation of affinity spaces and targeted supportive programs. San Pietro Travel Prize   This prize is awarded to one or more sophomores, juniors, or seniors  to fund an adventurous and challenging summer travel experience that  expands the recipients™ cultural horizons and knowledge of the world. Richard P. Schuster Memorial Prize   This prize is awarded to one or more juniors or seniors in chemistry  or chemical engineering on the basis of financial need and academic promise. Eleanor Searle Prize in Law, Politics, and Institutions  Established in 1999 by friends and colleagues to honor Eleanor Searle, the Caltech professor who had the distinction of being the first woman  at the Institute to receive a named professorship, this prize is awarded  annually to an undergraduate or graduate student whose work in his -tory or the social sciences exemplifies Searle™s interests in the use of  power, government, and law. Dr. Fred Shair Award for Program Diversity  Dr. Fred Shair award is given to individuals who stand out as strong  supporters of programs that increase the diversity and pluralism  in practice at Caltech. Dr. Shair was a member of the Chemical  Engineering faculty. One of his great accomplishments and contribu -tions to the campus was the creation of the Summer Undergraduate  Research (SURF) program in 1979. He later included high achieving  students from campuses across the country in an effort to support  equity in access to Caltech™s research communities. Renuka D. Sharma Prize and Award in Chemistry  This award recognizes a sophomore chemistry major for outstanding  performance during their freshman year. C.S. Shastry Prize in Physics This prize is awarded to a sophomore Ph 11 alumnus, majoring in  physics, to provide support for a summer research project conduct -ed at Caltech. The winner is chosen based on passion, curiosity, and  demonstrated ability. Don Shepard Award   This award is given one or more students who would find it difficult,  without additional financial help, to engage in extracurricular and cul-tural activities. The recipients are selected on the basis of their capacity  Prizes and Awards 238to take advantage of and to profit from these activities rather than on  the basis of their scholastic standing.Hallett Smith Prize This prize, established in 1997 to commemorate Professor Hallett  Smith™s long career as one of the 20th century™s most distinguished  Renaissance scholars, is awarded annually by the literature faculty to  the undergraduate student who writes the finest essay on Shakespeare. Paul Studenski Memorial Fund Prize This travel grant is awarded to a Caltech undergraduate who would  benefit from time away from the academic community in order to  obtain a better understanding of self and of their plans for the future.   The Studenski Fund was established by Dr. Eugene Studenski in mem -ory of his son, Paul, and administered by the Caltech Y. Student Residential Life Award  This award is presented to undergraduates whose concern for their  fellow students has been demonstrated by their persistent efforts to  improve the quality of undergraduate life and by effective communica -tion with members of the faculty and administration.Olga Taussky-Todd Prize  This prize provides support to a female undergraduate math major for a  summer experience to enrich their mathematical education.Thomas A. Tisch Prize for Undergraduate Teaching in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences The Undergraduate Teaching in CMS Awards were established in 2016  with a gift from Microsoft and then endowed through the generosity  of Thomas A. Tisch (BS ™61). The prize and honorarium are awarded  to a graduate and an undergraduate student for outstanding teaching  and course development in computing and mathematical sciences. Awardees are selected by a committee of CMS faculty members. Morgan Ward Prize   This prize is awarded to a freshman or sophomore who submits the  best problems and solutions in mathematics. Women Mentoring Women: Candace Rypisi Outstanding Mentor Award  Women Mentoring Women Candace Rypisi Outstanding Mentor Award  is given to women with a demonstrated willingness to share their  knowledge to enhance the professional and personal development of  their mentee(s), providing emotional and moral support and encour -agement, enhancing or helping facilitate access to career related infor -mation and exposure to various professional resources, opportunities,  networks, and other role models, promoting the mentee™s sense of  competence, confidence, and belonging. Women Mentoring Women: Helen McBride Outsanding Mentee Award  Women Mentoring Women Helen McBride Outstanding Mentee Award  is given to women who demonstrated a sincere desire to succeed as  Undergraduate Information 239a researcher and is committed to her personal development, open and  willing to learn from her mentor and receptive to advice and counsel,  worked with her mentor to establish realistic goals and demonstrated a  commitment to carrying them out.Fredrick J. Zeigler Memorial Award  The Fredrick J. Zeigler Memorial Award was established in 1989 to  honor Fredrick J. Zeigler, a member of the class of 1976 and an applied  mathematics major. This award recognizes an outstanding sophomore  or junior in pure or applied mathematics for their excellence in schol -arship as demonstrated in class activities or in the preparation of an  original paper or essay in any subject area.  Note: Prizes and awards may be subject to federal and state income tax. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS, ALL OPTIONS  To qualify for a Bachelor of Science degree at the Institute, students  must obtain passing grades in each of the required courses listed below;  must satisfy the additional requirements listed under the undergraduate  options; must complete a minimum of 486 units; and must achieve a  grade-point average of not less than 1.9. Students must also register for  the appropriate number of units that results in normal progress toward a  B.S. degree.The baccalaureate degree requires four years (12 terms) of residence  regardless of unit load each term or the total units earned. The four-year  residence requirement is separate from and in addition to any other  degree requirements. Students who are admitted as transfer students  or 3/2 students may be granted advanced standing and tuition credit  for academic work accepted in transfer to Caltech. However, transfer  and 3/2 students must enroll for a minimum of six terms at Caltech. Any  exceptions must be approved by the dean of undergraduate students  and the vice president for student affairs. Under normal circumstances the core and option requirements for  the B.S. degree are those stated in the catalog published in the first  year of a student™s enrollment at Caltech. Faculty actions or decisions  taken through the Faculty Board and the relevant faculty committees  may occasionally result in changes to these requirements. In the event  of exceptional circumstances, changes in an individual student™s grad -uation requirements may be sought by petition to the relevant Faculty  Representative(s) through procedures administered by the registrar.  Questions should be addressed to the registrar. Students must register for the Institute requirements in the year speci -fied, unless they have previous credit. If for some reason they are not able  to complete the requirements during the proper year, they must register  at the earliest possible opportunity. (The Curriculum Committee may in  unusual cases excuse undergraduate students from any of the following  Institute or option requirements upon presentation of petitions.) The Institute unit system is described in the opening paragraphs of section five of this catalog.Graduation Requirements 240CORE INSTITUTE REQUIREMENTS, ALL OPTIONSA Caltech education requires not just the depth of an option, but also  considerable breadth in basic science, humanities, and social science.  Caltech™s core curriculum prepares students for the interdisciplinary nature  of contemporary research in science and technology. This encourages a  culture of problem solving, collaboration, and communication while pro -viding valuable experience in all fields of science. Significant study in the  humanities and social sciences is an important component of Caltech™s  core curriculum, giving alumni the ability to navigate the societal, political,  and economic factors that influence, and are influenced by, their work.  The following requirements are applicable to incoming freshmen for  2021-22. Some information for continuing students has been provided as  footnotes, but guidance on special cases must be sought. Courses used  to satisfy core requirements may not be used to satisfy option electives. CoursesUnits1. Freshman Mathematics (Ma 1 abc) 272. Freshman Physics (Ph 1 abc)  273. Freshman Chemistry (Ch 1 ab)  154. Freshman Biology (Bi 1 or Bi 1 x) 1 95. Menu Class (currently Ay 1, EE 1, ESE 1,     Ge 1, or IST 4) 96. Freshman Chemistry Laboratory (Ch 3 a) 2 67. Additional Introductory Laboratory  68. Scientific Writing 3 39. Humanities Courses (as defined below)3610. Social Sciences Courses (as defined below)3611. Additional Humanities and Social Sciences Courses3612. Physical Education91 The biology core requirement can be met by either Bi 1 or Bi 1x. Alternatively, the requirement  may be fulfilled by taking both Bi 8 and Bi 9. Nine units must be taken on grades. 2 This requirement can also be met by completing Ch 3 x, Ch 4 a, Ch 8, or Ch/ChE 9. 3 This requirement may be met either by taking a course approved by the student™s option to  satisfy this requirement, or by taking En/Wr 84. Menu ClassesMenu classes are specifically designed for breadth. The intent of the menu  class requirement is to introduce students to a subject that they did not  plan to study. In many cases, it is the only class in that subject that they  ever take; in other cases, they may decide to take more classes in that  subject as a result. Students cannot take a menu class in a subject that  they have already taken classes in or in their current option. This require -ment must be completed by the end of sophomore year. Undergraduate Information 241Introductory Laboratory Requirement  All students are required to take at least 12 units of laboratory work in  experimental science during their freshman and sophomore years. Ch 3 a  (6 units) or Ch 3 x (6 units) shall be taken during the freshman year. The  additional 6 units must be chosen from one of the following: APh/EE 9  ab (6 units), APh/EE 24 (9 units), Bi 1x (9 units but only if Bi 1x is not being  used to satisfy the biology core requirement), Bi 10 (6 units), Ch 4 ab (9  units   ), Ch 8 (9 units), Ch/ChE 9 (9 units), EE/ME 7 (6 units), Ge 116  (9 units), ME 8 (6 units), Ph 3 (6 units), Ph 5 (9 units), Ph 8 bc (6 units),  or a more advanced laboratory. Computational laboratory courses may  not be used to satisfy this requirement.  Humanities and Social Sciences Requirements  All students must complete satisfactorily 108 units in the Division of the  Humanities and Social Sciences. Of these, 36 must be in the humanities  (English, history, history and philosophy of science, humanities, music,  philosophy, and visual culture) and 36 in the social sciences (anthropology,  business economics and management, economics, law, political science,  psychology, and social science), in each case divided equally between  introductory and advanced courses. The remaining 36 may be drawn from  humanities and social sciences, including HSS tutorial courses and 9 units  of either Wr 1 or Wr 2. They may not include BEM 102. They may not  include reading courses unless credit has been granted by petition to the  humanities or social science faculty. Language courses may count toward  the additional 36 unit requirement, with the exception of beginning, inter -mediate, and advanced classes in the student™s native language. In gener -al, no more than 18 units of freshman humanities may be counted toward  the 108-unit requirement.   Entering freshmen are required to take two terms of freshman human -ities; that is, cross-listed humanities courses numbered 60 or below in  the Catalog. These classes introduce students to the basic issues and  methods in the disciplines of English, history, philosophy, and visual cul -ture. Successful completion of two terms of freshman humanities is a  prerequisite for all humanities courses, except for foreign languages. It is  not a prerequisite, however, for introductory social sciences. The freshman  humanities classes may be taken in any two terms of the freshman year.  To encourage breadth, students will have to take their two freshman  humanities courses in different disciplines, the disciplines being English,  history, philosophy, and visual culture.   A student must take 18 units of advanced humanities courses as well.  The classes that count as advanced humanities courses are those num -bered 90 or above in English, history, history and philosophy of science,  humanities, music, philosophy, and visual culture. Language courses  do not count toward the advanced humanities requirement, except for  courses that are cross-listed or taught concurrently with one of the listed  subjects, such as humanities or visual culture. Courses used to fulfill the  advanced humanities requirement must be taken for grades. Courses  taken on a pass/fail basis will not fulfill the requirement.  Since writing is an important method for developing and sharing ideas,  all freshman humanities courses and other humanities courses numbered  above 90, with the exception of some foreign languages and courses,  Graduation Requirements 242require at least 4,000 words of composition. Instructors give extensive  feedback on written work and help students improve their prose. As enter -ing students may not be fully prepared for the writing in freshman human -ities, all freshmen and transfer students take a writing assessment before  the beginning of the fall term. On the basis of this assessment, some  students may be required to pass WR 1, 2, 3, 4 and/or 50 before entering  either freshman or advanced humanities classes.  Students are required to take two introductory social science courses  and 18 units of related advanced undergraduate social science courses.  Courses used to fulfill the advanced social science requirement must  be taken for grades; courses taken on a pass/fail basis will not fulfill the  requirement. The introductory social science courses must be drawn from  the following list: either An 14 or An 15 or An 16, Ec 11, PS 12, or Psy 13.  The 18 units of advanced undergraduate social science courses (num -bered 100 and above), in fields following at least one of their introductory  courses, must be taken as indicated here:   Introductory Course  Following CourseAn 14, 15 or 16advanced anthropology Ec 11 advanced economics or BEM (except BEM 102)PS 12 advanced political sciencePsy 13 advanced psychology For instance, a student who has taken An 14 and Ec 11 may use 18 units of advanced anthropology courses, or 18 units of advanced eco -nomics, or 9 units of advanced anthropology and 9 units of advanced  economics to fulfill the advanced social science requirement.  Included in the 12 humanities and social science courses, students must take at least 3 writing-intensive courses and these must be taken on grades. The graded advanced humanities courses count towards  this total. A student can select another course from advanced human -ities or a social science course with writing content (specifically An/PS 127, Ec 105, Ec 129, Ec 130, Ec 140, PS 99 ab, PS 120, PS 123, or PS 141). These three writing-intensive courses should be spread out over  the student™s sophomore, junior, and senior years. Physical Education Requirement Before graduation, each undergraduate is required to successfully com -plete 9 units of physical education. This requirement may be satisfied  entirely or in part by participation in intercollegiate athletics, or successful  completion of physical education class course work. All grades are issued  pass/fail. A maximum of 6 units per term may be applied toward gradua -tion requirements, with the total not to exceed 36 units. Participation as a  bona fide member of an intercollegiate team for the period covered by the  sport in a given term satisfies the requirement for that term. A broad program of instruction is provided each term. Late regis -tration is permitted during the first week of each term, provided there  is space available and with permission of the instructor. Standards for  Undergraduate Information 243evaluation of student performance will be clearly defined at the begin-ning of each course.Scientific Writing Requirement The scientific writing requirement can be satisfied by taking an appropriate  course offered by any division, or by taking En/Wr 84. The course used to  satisfy this requirement must be taken on grades. All options also require  a three-unit course in oral communication. Some options combine these  two requirements into one course. At the discretion of the option, the  scientific writing requirement can be satisfied by three units of additional  work associated with a senior thesis, focused on effective written scientific  communication.OptionsRequirements OralWritten ACM, APh, CNS,  CS, EE, EAS, IDS,  ME, MSSEC 10one of SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13AyAy 30 Ay 31 Bi, BEBi/BE 24same BEM, Ec, PSEn/Wr 84 sameChEChE 126Ch/ChE 91ChCh 90Ch/ChE 91En, H, HPS, PlEn/Wr 84 sameGPSSee Option Requirements   En/Wr 84 or one of  SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13MaMa 10Ma 11PhPh 70sameTYPICAL FIRST-YEAR COURSE SCHEDULE, ALL  OPTIONSDifferentiation into the various options begins in the second year. Units per term1st2nd3rdMa 1 abcFreshman Mathematics 999Ph 1 abcFreshman Physics 999Graduation Requirements 244Ch 1 abGeneral Chemistry69-Bi 1Principles of Biology--9Ch 3 aFundamental Techniques of Experimental Chemistry16or 6or 6Introductory courses in the hu -manities and social sciences. A wide choice of alternatives will be  available to students; the registrar  term.999Introductory laboratory courses 2xxxMenu course3 or additional elec-tivesxxxPEPhysical education4333xŠExcept for the minimum laboratory unit requirement, the num -ber of units chosen here is optional. If a student chooses no electives  except physical education and takes the minimum permissible labora-tory courses, the total unit requirement will usually be in the range of  39 to 45. First- and second-term freshmen will be limited to 45 units of  classroom and laboratory courses. A total loadŠincluding electivesŠof  more than 48 units per term is considered a heavy load. Loads of more  than 51 units require approval by the dean of students. 1 This course is offered in each of the three terms. Students may also take Ch 3 x. 2 The additional 6 units must be chosen from one of the following: APh/EE 9 ab (6 units), APh/ EE 24 (9 units), Bi 10 (6 units), Ch 4 ab (9 units), Ch 8 (9 units), Ch/ChE 9 (9 units), EE/ME 7 (6 units), Ge 116 (9 units), ME 8 (6 units),  Ph 3 (6 units), Ph 5 (9 units), Ph 8 bc (6 units) or a more  advanced laboratory course.3 Students must take a menu course in their freshman or sophomore year. These courses are  offered third quarter only. It is also possible to take one of these courses as an elective.  Menu courses currently include Ay 1, EE 1, ESE 1, Ge 1, or IST 4. 4 Three terms (9 units) of PE are required for the B.S. degree. Students need not elect to take  the required PE in the freshman year. It may be taken in any three terms before graduation. OTHER FIRST-YEAR COURSES In addition to the required core classes described on the previous  pages, freshmen are encouraged to participate in freshman seminar  classes, frontier classes, research tutorials and other research oppor -tunities.Starting in the 2011Œ12 academic year, Caltech began offering a  series of freshman seminars in which 10 to 15 freshmen and a faculty  member explore in depth an exciting topic in the lab, around a table,  or in the field. These courses cover a wide range of topics, including earthquakes, gravitational waves, and the science of music. Instructors may allow upperclassmen to enroll in these seminars after the conclu -sion of the pre-registration period for the upcoming term. See section  on Freshmen Seminars for more information. Caltech also offers a series of ﬁfrontier coursesﬂ that involve a week -ly presentation by a faculty member on a topic of current research.  These courses often meet at lunch time and serve pizza; hence, stu-Undergraduate Information 245dents refer to the courses as ﬁpizza courses.ﬂ The frontier courses are  an opportunity for students to meet the Caltech faculty and to hear about state-of-the-art research projects for the summer or academic  year. There are a total of 10 frontier courses offered for freshmen in  biology, chemistry, mathematics, physics, geology and planetary sci -ences, engineering, computer science, chemical engineering, bioengi-neering, and electrical engineering.Currently there are three ﬁresearch tutorialsﬂ for freshmen: one in  physics, one in biology, and one in chemistry. These tutorials have many  of the same features as the freshman seminars. In physics, the research  tutorial includes approximately seven freshmen and extends over three  academic terms plus the summer. The purpose is to demonstrate how  research opportunities arise, are evaluated, and are tested, and how the  ideas that survive develop in larger projects. In biology and chemistry,  the tutorials are offered in the winter and spring quarters and involve  small group discussions on special areas or problems in biology, bio -technology, and chemistry. More than 80 percent of Caltech students participate in research at  some point in their academic career. Students may embark on research  activities by registering for research credits with a faculty member, by  working in a laboratory for pay during the summer or academic year,  by completing a senior thesis, or by participating in Caltech™s Summer  Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program. The SURF pro -gram is described on page 11.AEROSPACE MINOR (A e)The aerospace minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s under -graduate degrees and is designed for students who wish to broaden  their knowledge beyond their normal major or who may wish to pursue  a graduate program involving aerospace or aeronautical engineering.  Students completing the aerospace minor requirements will have the  phrase ﬂminor in aerospace engineeringﬂ added to their transcripts. Ae Minor Requirements  1. Complete Ae 105 abc. 2. Complete a second three-term 100-level Ae class, chosen from  Ae 101 abc, 102 abc, 104 abc, 121 abc, Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab, or 27 units of selected Ae courses approved by the minor advis -er. All Ae courses to be applied to fulfill the aerospace minor  requirements must be taken for grades, and students must  maintain an average grade of B or higher for all courses with no individual grade lower than a C. Courses that are used to  satisfy the aerospace minor cannot be used to satisfy course  requirements in the major options. Courses taken as part of the  aerospace minor are counted toward the total 486-unit Institute  graduation requirements. A typical course sequence would be to  take Ae 105 abc and the second Ae course in the senior year.  Graduation Requirements 246APPLIED AND COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS (ACM)  The undergraduate option in applied and computational mathematics with -in the Computing & Mathematical Sciences department seeks to address  the interests of those students who want to combine their basic studies in  mathematics with considerable involvement in applications. This program  is designed to give students a thorough training in fundamental compu -tational and applied mathematics and to develop their research ability in  a specific application field. The fields of application include a wide range  of areas such as fluid mechanics, materials science, and mathematical  biology, engineering applications, image processing, and mathematical  finance. The training essential for future careers in applied mathematics in  academia, national laboratories, or in industry is provided, especially when  combined with graduate work, by successful completion of the require -ments for an undergraduate degree in applied and computational mathe -matics. Complete programs will be worked out with faculty advisers. ACM Double Majors Students interested in simultaneously pursuing a degree in a second  option must fulfill all the requirements of the ACM option. Classes can -not be counted towards both options unless specifically required by  both.  To enroll in the program, the student should meet and discuss  their plans with the option representative. In general, approval is contin -gent on good academic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for handling the heavier course load.  ACM Option Requirements 1. Mathematical Fundamentals: Ma 2; Ma 3; Ma 6 ab or Ma 121 ab; Ma 6 c or CS 21; Ma 108 ab. Taking the analytical tracks of  Ma 1 bc is strongly encouraged. 2. Programming Fundamentals: CS 1 or CS 1x; and basic numeri -cal algorithms:  ACM 11.3. Communication Fundamentals: SEC 10; one of SEC 11-13.4. Core Classes:  a. Introductory Methods: ACM 95 ab.  b. Linear Algebra: ACM 104 or ACM 107. c. Probability: ACM 116 or CMS/ACM 117.  d. Mathematical Methods: ACM 101 ab. e. Numerical Analysis: ACM 106 ab. 5. ACM Electives: In addition to all of the above requirements,  three 100+ ACM courses approved by the adviser; up to 9 units  of ACM 80 abc or ACM 81 abc can be counted towards this  requirement with adviser approval. 6. Sequence: In addition to all of the above requirements, one  27-unit 100+ sequence in science engineering, or social scienc-es approved by the option representative. 7. Scientific Fundamentals: In addition to all of the above require -ments, 18 units selected from BE 25, Bi 8, Bi 9, Ch 21 abc, Ch  25, Ch 41 abc, ME 11 abc, ME 12 abc, Ph 2 abc, or Ph 12 abc.8. Passing grades must be obtained in a total of 486 units, includ-ing the courses listed above. Courses satisfying option require -ments must be taken for grades (except when courses are only   Undergraduate Information 247ACM Typical Course Schedule                               Units per term1st2nd3rd Second yearMa 2Differential Equations 9--Ma 3Intro. to Probability and Statistics -9-Ma 6 ab alt.Ma 121 ab +Ma 6 c alt.CS 21 (0-9-18)Intro. to Discrete Mathematics999Science Requirement See requirements listed above99-ACM 11Intro to Matlab and Mathematica --6CS 1Intro. to Computer Programming 9-- HSS electives999 Electives (see option requirements  5, 6 above)-918  Total 454542Third Year Ma 108 abcClassical Analysis99-ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied Math -1212ACM/IDS 104 (or 107)Appl. Linear Algebra9--ACM/EE/IDS 116 (or 117)Intro. To Probability Models 9-- HSS electives999 Electives (see option requirements  5, 6 above)91212SEC 10Technical Seminar Presentation - 3-One of SEC 11-13Written Tech. Comm. in Engrng and  Appl. Sci.--3  Total 454536Fourth Year ACM/IDS 101 abMethods of Appl. Math1212-ACM 106 abIntro. Methods of Comput. Math 1212-Graduation Requirements 248 HSS elective999 Electives9927  Total 424236  APPLIED PHYSICS OPTION (APh)The applied physics option is designed to extend knowledge of the principles of pure physics to the development of new technologies.  Research in applied physics focuses primarily on problems of tech -nological importance. The interdisciplinary nature of this option allows  considerable flexibility in coursework, training and individual research  interests to enhance maximum breadth and depth. Current areas of specialization within applied physics span a wide  range of topics such as Photonics including multiwavelength fiber tele-communications, integrated microphotonic and nanophotonic devices,  holographic data processing and storage, and optical approaches to  quantum computation; Solid-state materials and device work including nanostructured materials and devices, wide bandgap semiconduc -tors and heterostructures for optoelectronics, photovoltaics, novel  memory devices, and spin-dependent transport; Biophysics including single-molecule-scale studies of the mechanics of DNA, proteins, and  their assemblies; Plasma-physics including spheromak plasmas for  fusion application, plasma processes occurring in the sun, and the  dynamics of pure electron plasmas; Hydrodynamics, nonlinear dynam -ics and thermal behavior in small scale systems including symmetry breaking in soft condensed matter, micro/nanofluidic, optofluidic, and  biofluidic devices, optical trapping in fluids, pattern formation and  phase separation in nanoscale films and convection-diffusive phenom -ena in natural and mimetic systems.APh Option Requirements Note: Items in brackets represent optional replacements. 1. SEC 10 and one of SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13. SEC 11-13 requirement can be satisfied by three units of additional work  associated with the senior thesis (APh 78 or APh 79), or by tak-ing Ph 70, En/Wr 84 or Bi/BE 24. 2. Any three of the following: APh/EE 9 b, APh/EE 23, APh/EE 24,  Ph 3, Ph 5, Ph 6, or Ph 7.3. Ph 12 abc, APh/MS 105 ab [Ae/ME 118 or ChE/Ch 165 or Ph  127a; ChE/Ch 164 or Ph 127b], Ph 106 abc, and Ph 125 ab [Ch  125 ab]4. Ma 2, Ma 3, and ACM 95 ab.5. Either APh 78 abc or APh 79 abc, or one term of APh 77 and one term of any of the following: Ph 77, EE 91, Ch 6, Ae/APh 104 bc, or MS 90. Any substitutions or additions require prior  approval of the option representative. 6. One additional advanced sequence of APh courses numbered  over 100, such as: APh 101 abc, APh/MS 105 abc, APh 114 abc, APh/Ph 115 and APh/Ph/Ae 116, APh/EE 130, 131, and 132, APh 156 abc, APh/EE 190 abc, or BE/APh 161 and 162. Undergraduate Information 249Note that APh 100 and APh 200 do not satisfy this requirement.  Any substitutions or additions require prior approval of the  option representative. 7. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, includ -ing the courses listed above. No course in fulfillment of option requirements may be taken on a pass/fail basis. 8. Any student whose grade-point average is less than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the subjects listed above may be refused permission to continue work in this option. APh Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year  ACM 95abIntro. Methods of Applied Math.  - 1212Ma 2  9 - - Ma 3Intro. to Probability and Statis -tics- 9- Ph 12abcWaves, Quantum Mechanics and  Statistical Physics999 HSS Electives999Laboratory Electives¹66 6Other Electives²9 -9Total 424545Third Year      APh 105ab States of Matter99-APh 110abTopics in Applied Physics 22 - Ph 106abcTopics in Classical Physics 999Ph 125ab Quantum Mechanics99 - HSS Electives999Other Electives²99 27 Total 47 47 45 Fourth Year      APh 78abc or APh 79abcSenior Thesisl³ or Senior Thesis, Theoretical³ 999Or APh 77Laboratory in Applied Physics³ -99Graduation Requirements 250 Advanced Electives² 99 9 HSS Electives999 Other Electives including APh 100 1818 18   Total 4545 45 1 See item 2, option requirements. 2 See item 6, option requirements. 3 See item 5, option requirements. Suggested ElectivesStudents are encouraged to obtain a well-rounded course of study pur -suant to the B.S. degree in applied physics. The option representative  and/or undergraduate adviser will gladly assist students in choosing  appropriate elective courses. Students ultimately interested in pursuing  an advanced degree in applied physics or related fields are encouraged  to complete a senior thesis project through APh 78 or APh 79. ASTROPHYSICS OPTION AND MINOR (Ay)With the goal of understanding the physical processes that govern the  universe, its constituents, and their origins and evolution, astronomy uses  the apparatus and methodology of physics to gather and interpret data.  Theoretical work and technology development round out astrophysics.  In what follows, we use the terms ﬁastronomyﬂ and ﬁastrophysicsﬂ inter -changeably. The astrophysics option is designed to give the student an  understanding of the basic facts and concepts of astronomy today, to  stimulate their interest in research, and to provide a basis for graduate  work in astronomy/astrophysics.  Undergraduate Information Students petitioning to double-major in Astrophysics and Physics must  present a plan that has a minimum of 92 units that are solely counted  as satisfying the Ay requirements, and a minimum of 92 units that are  solely counted as satisfying the Ph requirements. Attention is called to the fact that any student whose grade-point average is less than 1.9 at the end of an academic year in the subjects listed in the Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy may, at  the discretion of their department, be refused permission to continue  the work in this option.Ay Option Requirements 1.  Ay 20, 21, 101, 102, 30 or one term of Ay 141, Ay 31, Ma 2, Ma  3, Ph 2 abc or Ph 12 abc, Ph 125 ab, and Ph 106 abc.2.  Any three of Ph 3, Ph 5, Ph 6, Ph 7, or Ay 105. APh 23 and 24  taken as a pair may be substituted for one of these labs.  3.  63 additional units of Ay or Ph courses. Ph 127 a, Ph 136 bc and  one of Ph 21, Ph 22, Ph 121 abc are strongly recommended. Undergraduate Information 2514.  27 additional units of science or engineering electives, of which  18 must be outside the Division of Physics, Mathematics and  Astronomy. ACM 95 ab is a popular choice. Core classes ( see  pages 240Œ244) or other introductory-level courses such as CS 1  do not count toward fulfillment of this requirement. 5.  Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including the  courses listed above. Courses satisfying requirements 1, 2, and 3  must be taken for grades unless they are pass/fail only. Ay Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rdSecond Year Ph 12 abc or Ph 2 abcSophomore Physics 999Ma 2, Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics 99-Ay 20 Basic Astronomy and the  Galaxy 9--Ay 21 Galaxies and Cosmology-9-Ay 30 Intro. to Modern Research 3--Ph 31 or 51Physics Laboratory9--ACM 95 ab2Intro. Methods of App. Math. -1212PH 21 OR 223Computational Tools --6HSS Electives9918Total 484845Third Year Ph 125 abc4Quantum Mechanics999Ph 106 abcTopics in Classical Physics 999Ay 101 The Physics of Stars9--Ay 102 Physics of the Interstellar Medium-9-Ay 104 3 High Energy Astrophysics --9Ph 127 a3Statistical Physics9--Graduation Requirements 252PH 61, 71, OR APH 23/241Physics Laboratory-99Other Electives-9-HSS Electives9-9Total 454545Fourth Year Ay 31 Written Communication --3Ay 105 1Astronomy Instrumentation  Lab--9Ay/Ph Electives 999Ay 78 Senior Thesis999Ph 1213 or Ay 117 Computational Analysis-6-Ay 141 b 3 Research Conference in  Astronomy -3-Other Electives1899HSS Electives999Total 454548 1 Choose among laboratory classes to satisfy Option Requirement 2.  2 ACM 95 is a popular choice for Option Requirement 4. Other courses may also be used.  3 Strongly recommended courses for Option Requirement 3. Other courses may be substituted.   4 Phys 125c is strongly recommended and can be counted towards Option Requirement 3.  The sequence Ay 20, 21 constitutes a solid introduction to modern  astrophysics, with more advanced courses (Ay 101, 102, plus Ay elec -tives) taken in the junior and senior years. The course schedule above is  an example leading to excellent preparation for graduate study, but it is  also possible to fulfill the option requirements with a more diverse set of  electives across options, and even to take Ay 20, 21 junior year and Ay  101, 102 senior year. In either scenario, it is desirable for a student to gain  as broad a background as possible in related fields of science and engi -neering. An ability to present one™s work is vital to a successful career  in any field. The oral communications requirement can be satisfied by  presenting during a term of Ay 141, or with Ay 30. Ay 31 satisfies the  written communication requirement.  Students are encouraged (but not required) to undertake research  leading to a senior thesis; credit for this work is provided through Ay  78. Non-thesis research credits may be earned through Ay 142 with a  maximum of 9 units per term. Elective credit can be given for no more  than 3 terms of Ay 142. Computational skills may be acquired through   Undergraduate Information 253e.g. ACM 11, ACM 106, CS 2, CS 11, CS 21, CS 38, CS 121, CMS 155,  Ph 20, Ph 21, Ph 121. Students are strongly advised to take advanced mathematical meth -ods in ACM95 and Ph 129, and an advanced statistical physics or ther-modynamics course such as Ph 127. Suggested Electives The student may elect any course offered in any division in a given  term, provided that they have has the necessary prerequisites for that  course. The following courses are useful to work in various fields of  astronomy and astrophysics: ACM 95, ACM 106, APh 17, APh/EE  23/24, APh/EE 117, Ay 104, Ay 105, Ay 107, Ay 117, Ay 121Œ127, Ch  125 ab, EE 45, EE/Ae 157, Ge/Ay 11 c, Ge 103, Ge/Ch 128, Ge 131,  Ge/Ay 132, 133, 137, Ge 141, Ma 4, Ma 112, ME 11, ME 12, Ph 20Œ22,  Ph 77, 101, 121, 127, 129, 136, 137, 199, 236 (this is not necessarily a  complete list).Ay Option Minor The Ay minor is expected to appeal to student interest in the field of  astronomy that arises from overlap, not only with the most traditional  area of physics, but with more recent and rapidly developing intersec -tions of astronomy with e.g. computer science, certain aspects of engi -neering, chemistry, planetary science, and perhaps some day biology. Ay minor coursework is designed to prepare the capable student to  undertake cross-disciplinary research involving astronomy. A firm basis  for this is established with sophomore level physics and astronomy  requirements. Junior year courses sample from among the Ay major  requirements and electives. Both traditional theory courses and more  hands-on practical training courses are available, with one course of  each type recommended for breadth. Senior year features research and  written presentation of the research, with additional electives encour -aged.Courses taken in the minor option must be taken for grades (no P/F), except for Ay 142 which is offered as P/F only. Courses 100 and above  can not be used to also satisfy requirements in the student™s major  option.Ay Option Minor Requirements 1. Basis in physics: either Ph 2ab or Ph12 ab (18 units)2. Introductory Astronomy: any two of Ge/Ay 11c, Ay 20, or Ay 21  (18 units)3. In-depth Astrophysics, Instrumentation, and Data: any two of: Ay  101, Ay 102, Ay 104, Ge/Ay 133, Ay 105, Ay/Ge 107, Ay 122 (18  units)4. Research: both Ay 142 (9 units) and Ay 144 (3 units) = (12 units) Total units required: 66 Other courses of interest to students seeking Ay minor competency  include Ay 119, Ay 198, Ay 141, Ph 2c/12c, Ph 101, EE 40, APh/EE 23.  These do not contribute to credit for the minor, however. Course selection should be done in consultation with the Ay option  Graduation Requirements 254representative, who can advise on an appropriate curriculum for a given  student™s goals. As a complement to the required Ay 142 enrollment, SURF research  with the relevant Ay, Ph, or Pl.Sc. faculty member is encouraged. BIOENGINEERING OPTION (BE)BE Aims and ScopeThe undergraduate bioengineering option provides a foundation for  graduate studies and career paths that require the application of engi -neering principles to the design, analysis, construction, and manipula-tion of biological systems, and in the discovery and application of new engineering principles inspired by the properties of biological systems.  By graduation, students are expected to have learned basic laborato -ry and engineering methods used in a broad range of bioengineering  sub-disciplines.Students will also have learned quantitative and analytic skills vital to  experiments and system designs. Graduating students are expected to be  able to critically evaluate and understand bioengineering literature, and be  able to work in a team and communicate effectively. To accomplish these goals, students are expected to complete a  series of required courses designed to introduce them to a representative  range of bioengineering sub-disciplines, provide them with a solid quan -titative analysis foundation, and provide them with opportunities to work  in teams through a number of project-oriented courses. Students will  receive instruction in scientific communications through Bi/BE 24. Undergraduate research is encouraged both during the academic  year and through participation in summer research programs. Students should present a plan for satisfying all degree requirements to  their academic adviser by the end of the third term of the second year. Students with a grade-point average lower than 1.9 will not be allowed to continue in the option except with special permission from  the option representative.   BE Option Requirements 1. BE 1; BE/APh 161; ChE/BE 163; two courses from BE 150, BE  159, and BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 a.2.  Experimental methods: Bi 1x; one of BE/EE/MedE 189 a or BE 107; one of ChE 130 or BE/CS 196 a. Students are strongly  encouraged to enroll in Bi 1x as freshmen; Bi 1x must be com -pleted by the sophomore year. Nine total units of BE 98 and BE  99 may be used in place of one of these courses (except Bi 1x) with the approval of the undergraduate option representative to  ensure that the student™s research project provides comparable  experimental laboratory experience. BE 98 and BE 99 units used to satisfy this requirement may not also be counted toward the  elective requirement. 3. Biology, chemistry, and physics: two terms out of three from Ph  2 abc (Ch 21 a may be used in place of Ph 2 b and Ch 21 c may be used in place of Ph 2 c); Bi 8; Bi 9; BE 25; Ch 41 a; Ch/Bi 110. One advanced biology course of at least 9 units selected Undergraduate Information 255from Ch/Bi 111, Bi 114, Bi 117, Bi 122, Bi 145 ab, NB/Bi/CNS  150, BE 150, Bi/BE/CS 183, or approved by the undergraduate  option representative.  4. Mathematical and computational methods: ACM 95 ab; Ma 2; Ma 3; one course from ChE 105, CDS 110, or ACM 116; 9 units  selected from CS 1, CS 2, CS 3, CS 21, CS 24, and CS 38. 5. 36 units of BE electives. These may include BE 98 and BE 99 (up to 12 units), any BE course numbered 100 or above, any of  the BE-approved electives listed below, or any relevant course  approved by the option representative. Additionally, courses list -ed in requirements 1-3 that are not used to fulfill those require -ments may be counted as electives.6. Communication: Bi/BE 24.7. Courses satisfying option requirements must be taken for grades  (except when courses are only available P/F). Passing grades  must be earned in a total of 486 units.  BE-Approved Electives Biology: Bi/Ge 105, Bi/CNS/NB 162, Bi 190. Biodevices: EE 112, EE 113, EE/MedE 114 ab, APh/EE 9 ab, EE 45, EE  111, EE 151, CS/CNS/EE 156 a.Biomechanics:  ME 12 abc, ME 14, Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc, Ae/APh/CE/ME 102 abc, Ae/APh 104 abc, ME 11 abc, ChE 103 abc.Computational Biology: CS/CNS/EE 156 a Synthetic biology: Ch 41 bc, ChE/Ch 148, ChE/Ch 164, ChE/Ch 165, APh/MS 105 abc, APh 17.BE Typical Course Schedule (Specific courses are representative and may be substituted per option  requirements.) Students planning on pursuing graduate study should  have a strong emphasis on research in their schedule and are advised  to start their sophomore year and continue throughout their study. Units per term1st2nd3rd First Year Ma 1 abcFreshman Mathematics 999Ph 1 abcFreshman Physics 999Ch 1 abGeneral Chemistry69-Ch 3 aFundamental Techniques of  Experimental Chemistry-6  - CS 1Introduction to Computer  Programmng 9--Freshman Humanities 9-9Graduation Requirements 256Bi 1 xThe Great Ideas of Biology:  Exploration through Experi -mentation--9BE 1Frontiers in Bioengineering 1--Bi 8Introduction to Molecular  Biology-9-Bi 9Cell Biology--9Total 434245Second Year Ma 2, Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics 99-Ph 2 acSophomore Physics 9-9Ch 41 aOrganic Chemistry 9--ACM 95 abIntroductory Methods of  Applied Mathematics for the Physical Sciences -1212BE 25Biophysical Chemistry-9-Bi/BE 24  for Biological Scientists and Engineers-6-Menu course--9HSS electives18-9Physical education-3-Total 453939Third Year Ch/Bi 110Introduction to Biochem -istry12--ChE/BE 163Introduction to Biomolecu -lar Engineering 12--BE/CS 196 a      Design and Construction of Programmable Molecular  Systems -12-BE 150Biological Circuit Design  --9BE Electives 999Undergraduate Information 257BE 98 Undergraduate Research in  Bioengineering -69 Advanced Biology Elective --9HSS 999Physical Education-3-Total 423945Fourth Year BE/EE/MedE 189 aDesign and Construction of Biodevices 12--BE 159 Mechanics and Signal Transduction in Morpho -genesis-9-BE/APh 161Physical Biology of the Cell-12-ChE 105Dynamics and Control of  Chemical Systems --9Misc. Elective9-9 BE 99Senior Thesis in Bioengin-erring 999HSS Electives999BE Electives9--Physical Education--3Total 393939BIOLOGY OPTION (Bi)The undergraduate option in biology is designed to build on a solid foun -dation in mathematics and physical science by providing an introduction  to the basic facts, concepts, problems, and methodologies of biological  science. The option serves as a basis for graduate study in any field of  biology or for admission to the study of medicine. Instruction is offered  in the form of participation in the ongoing research programs of the  division, as well as in formal course work. Course work emphasizes the  more general and fundamental properties of living organisms, and areas  of current research interest, rather than the traditional distinct fields with -in the life sciences.The division encourages undergraduate participation in its research  program and believes that research participation should be a part of  each student™s program of study. Students may elect to prepare an  undergraduate thesis (Bi 90). Research opportunities may be arranged  with individual faculty members, or guidance may be obtained from a  student™s individual faculty adviser in the division or from the biology  undergraduate student adviser. Graduation Requirements 258The requirements listed below for the biology option are minimal  requirements. An adequate preparation for graduate work in biology will  normally include additional elective research or course work in biology  and/or advanced course work in other sciences or in mathematics.  Flexibility to accommodate varied individual scientific interests, within  the broad scope of biology, is achieved through the provision of elective  courses, arrangements for individual research (Bi 22), and tutorial instruc -tion (Bi 23). In addition, arrangements may be made to take courses at  neighboring institutions in fields of biology that are not represented in our  curriculum.Premedical Program The undergraduate course for premedical students is essentially the  same as that for biology students and is intended as a basis for later careers in research as well as in the practice of medicine. It differs in  some respects from premedical curricula of other schools; however,  it has been quite generally accepted as satisfying admission require -ments of medical schools. It is recommended that all students contemplating application to med -ical school consult with the premed adviser at Careers, Advising, and  Experiential Learning or Professor David Chan in the Division of Biology  and Biological Engineering. Bi Option Requirements The following required courses must all be taken on grades, with the  exception of Bi 8 if taken in freshman year and Bi 22. Freshmen taking  Bi 8 must maintain shadow grades that indicate satisfactory progress.1. Bi 8, Bi 9, Bi 117, Bi 122, NB/Bi/CNS 150, and Ch 41 abc.2. Ma 2, Ma 3, and any two terms of Ph 2 abc. This requirement  can also be satisfied in part by successfully taking a ﬂreason -ableﬂ replacement for any of these required courses. A ﬂrea -sonableﬂ replacement will be defined by: (1) Equally or more  advanced quantitative coursework, e.g. Ch 21 a for Ph 2 b, Ch 21 c for Ph 2 c and; (2) Essentially similar scope of subject mat-ter as the course replaced, e.g. BE 25 for Ph 2 c. The Biology  option representative will be empowered to make this determi -nation with aid of an advisory list which can be updated as rele -vant new courses are developed inside and outside of biology. 3. One advanced laboratory course (100- or 200-level), or Bi 21 with  presentation, or three terms of undergraduate thesis (Bi 90 abc). 4. Two courses chosen from Ch/BI 110, 111, and/or BMB/Bi/Ch  170, 173 or Ch 145.5. Scientific writing requirement met by taking Bi/BE 24 (six units),  or by taking any other writing course such as En/Wr 84 (nine  units) plus oral presentation at SURF Seminar Day or equivalent,  with option representative approval. 6. A minimum of 8 courses of biology electives must be taken. To  count as a biology elective, a course must satisfy the following: a. The course is not used to satisfy requirement 1-5.  b. 100-level or above. c. The course must be a biology or a bioengineering course. d. At least two elective courses must be nine units each, and-must be taken for grades.Undergraduate Information 2597. e. A minimum total of four elective courses must be taken for grades.8. Exceptions are as follow:  a. Substantial lab research for credit (Bi 22) beyond the 12-     unit minimum can be counted among the electives. b. Courses from other options with significant relevance to      biology may be used as electives with permission from the      biology option representative. 9. A minimum total of 170 units of biology must be taken and passed. Bi 1, Bi 2, Bi 10, and BE/Bi/CNS/NB 197 cannot be counted toward this total. Bioengineering courses used for elec -tives can be counted toward this total. 10. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  the courses listed above. Planning the Biology Course ScheduleMost students interested in biology elect to take Bi8 and Bi9 in their  first year, to open access to the widest range of biology electives.  Bi 10 or Bi1x is not required for the biology option but is commonly  taken by biology students to meet the Institute introductory labora -tory requirement.  Prerequisites listed for individual biology courses are advisory, not  compulsory. They indicate the kind of background that is assumed  for the work level of the course. They may be waived if the instruc-tor gives explicit permission.  BE 25 is strongly recommended for students interested in post -graduate work in biology, as physical chemistry is required by most  graduate programs. Additional courses of potential interest to biology majors include  Ge 11 b, BE 159, BE/APh 161, BE/ChE 163, BMB/Ch 178 and  advanced geobiology courses.  Undergraduates are generally welcome to take 200-level courses  with the instructor™s permission or strong preparation, unless other -wise indicated.Bi Typical Course Schedule  (Required courses and representative examples of electives)  Units per term     1st 2nd3rd  First year Ma 1 abc Freshman Mathematics 999Ph 1 abcFreshman Physics 999Ch 1abGeneral Chemistry 69-Hum <= 60Freshman Humanities 9-9Ch 3aChemistry Lab-6-Graduation Requirements 260CS 1Introduction to Computer  Programming 9--Bi 8Foundational Principles of Molecular Biology-9-Bi 9Cell Biology--9Bi 1xThe Great Ideas of Biology:  Exploration through Exper -imentation--9Total 424245   Second year    Ma 2 9--Ma 3Introduction to Probability  and Statistics-9-Ph 2bcSophomore Physics 99-OR   BE 25Biophysical Chemistry-9-Ch 41abcOrganic Chemistry 999Introductory Social Sci -ences9-9---Bi 122Genetics9--Bi 117Developmental Biology-9-NB/Bi/CNS/150Introduction to Neurosci -ence--10Two electives  in spring, e.g.,   Bi 160Molecular Basis of Animal Evolution--9Bi/BE/BMB 115Viruses and Application for  Biological Systems--9Total 454546   Third year     Advanced Humanities-99Advanced Social Sciences9-9Undergraduate Information 261Additional HSS--9Ch/Bi 110Introduction to Biochem -istry12--Ch/Bi 111Biochemistry of Gene Expression -12-Bi/BE 24Technical Communication  (fall or spring)--6Two electives  in fall, e.g.,   Bi 145 aTissue and Organ Physiolo -gy99-ESE/Bi 166Microbial Physiology 9--Bi/CNS/NB 195Mathematics in Biology9--Two electives  in winter, e.g.,    Bi/Ge/ESE 105Evolution-9-Bi 118Morphogenesis of Devel-opmental Systems-9-Bi 116Microbial Genetics -9-Bi/BE 183Introduction to Computa -tional Biology and Bioinfor-matics-9-Two electives  in spring, e.g.,   Bi/CNS 158Vertebrate Evolution --9BiBMB 189The Cell Cycle and Ge-nomic Stability--6BE/Bi 101Order of Magnitude Biology --6Begin taking research  credits     Bi 22Undergraduate Research 666Total 454546Fourth year    Additional HSS999Two to three  electives each term, e.g.,   Graduation Requirements 262BE/Bi 103 aIntroduction to Data  Analysis in the Biological Sciences9--NB/Bi/CNS/154Principles of Neuroscience 9--Bi 190Systems Genetics6--Bi 192Introduction to Systems  Biology6--Bi/BE 129The Biology and Treatment  of Cancer -9-Bi 214Stem Cells and Hemato-poiesis-9-BE/Aph 161Physical Biology of the Cell-12-Ge/Bi 159Astrobiology -9-BE 107Exploring Biological Princi-ples through Bio-Inspired  Designs--9BE 153Case Studies in Systems Physiology--9NB/Bi/CNS/157Comparative Nervous Systems--9Bi 180Plant and Soil Science--9Pursue an in-depth research  project:    Bi 90Undergraduate Thesis 12+12+12+Total 40+40+40+Biology Minor Requirements The biology minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s under -graduate degrees. It is designed for students who wish to broaden their  studies beyond their major to include biology. Students completing  the biology minor requirements will have the phrase ﬂminor in biologyﬂ  added to their transcripts. 1. Biology fundamentals. Bi 8 and Bi 9.  2. Intermediate Biology. Any two of the following classes: Bi 122; Bi  117; and NB/Bi/CNS 150; and Ch 41 a.Advanced Biology. 36 units of advanced biology electives (100- or  200-level) that are not applied to the above requirements and are not   option, approved by their assigned biology adviser or the option repre -sentative.Undergraduate Information 263BUSINESS, ECONOMICS, AND MANAGEMENT OPTION (BEM)The goal of the business, economics, and management (BEM) option is to provide students with the analytical tools to operate successfully in  a modern business environment and to prepare students interested in  pursuing graduate studies in related fields. The emphasis is on entre -preneurship, finance, and strategy, in free-market, competitive, and stra -tegic situations. Today™s business environment is complex, and therefore  required courses in this option are highly analytical. Students often pair  the BEM option as a double major with a science or engineering option.  The BEM option also serves as a standalone major for students interested  in careers in the financial industry, consulting, or entrepreneurial ventures.  Expected learning outcomes from completing the BEM option include:       finance, risk management, business strategy, and developing  new ventures;   quantitative methods;     -agement on society in general.  Note: The official source on requirements for graduation is the Caltech  catalog from the year in which a student began studies at Caltech.  Please see the catalog online, from this and previous years, for infor -mation regarding the applicable option requirements.   BEM Option Requirements It is highly recommended to take a statistics/econometrics course, as  well as BEM 102 and BEM 103 before other BEM courses. 1.  Ec 11, Ec 122, Ma 3 or ACM/EE/IDS 116, and PS/Ec 172.2.  BEM 102 and BEM 103.3.  Three courses out of BEM 104, BEM 105, BEM 110, or BEM  117.4.  Writing/oral presentation courses: a scientific writing requirement  course, and a three-unit course in oral communication, offered  by any division (some options combine these two requirements  into one course, that can be taken to satisfy this requirement), or  En/Wr 84. The course used to satisfy this requirement must be  taken on grades.5. Five courses, to be chosen from the menu (may be taken pass/ fail): any BEM courses (excluding the ones listed under 1 and 2 above), ACM 113, ACM/EE/IDS 116 (if not taken under require -ment 1), An/PS 127, CS/Ec 149, Ec/ACM/CS 112, Ec 105, 121 ab, 129, 130, 135, Ec/PS 160 abc, Ge/ESE 118, Ma 112a and Ma/ACM/IDS 140ab. No more than one from these three: CMS/ CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155, CS/CNS/EE 156a and IDS/ACM/CS 157. Graduation Requirements 264Other courses with permission of BEM option representative. 6.  45 additional units of science (including anthropology, econom -ics, political science, psychology, social science), mathematics,  and engineering courses; this requirement cannot be satisfied by  courses listed as satisfying the introductory laboratory require -ment or by any course with a number less than 100 (may be taken pass/fail).7.  Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  all courses used to satisfy the above requirements BEM Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 2 & Ma 3 Sophomore Mathematics 99-Menu Course--9Ec 11Introduction to Economics  9--BEM 102Introduction toAccounting --9BEM 103Introduction to Finance 9--PS/Ec 172Game Theory-9-Electives 1182727Total 454545Third Year BEM 104Investments-9-BEM 105Options9--Ec 122Econometrics9--Electives 1273745Total 484545Fourth Year En/Wr 84 (or 3 unit course in oral communications and a  -ment course--9Undergraduate Information  265Ec 105Firms, Competition, and Industrial Organization 9--BEM110Venture Capital -9-Electives363636Total 4545451 See option requirements 4 and 5 CHEMICAL ENGINEERING OPTION (ChE)Caltech™s Chemical Engineering option prepares its students for the future,  whether that be furthering research and development in industry, or con -tinuing their studies at the graduate level. This is accomplished through  a mixture of interdisciplinary classes that expose students to almost  every field of science (chemistry, physics, mathematics, and biology). The  inherently computational nature of chemical engineering shines through  courses™ active use ofcomputational software such as Python, Matlab, and  Mathematica for modelling and data analysis. At the same time, classes  and independent projects also focus on systematic analysis and problem  solving, incorporating social, economic, environmental, and of course,  technical constraints to tackle the open-ended challenges of today and  tomorrow with new and creative solutions. The option™s curriculum begins in students™ second year and contin -ues through their third year with fundamental studies in mass transfer,  thermodynamics, reactor design, and chemical kinetics. Upon building a  common, foundational toolkit, chemical engineers then specialize in one  of five different tracks: (biomolecular, sustainability, process, materials, or  computational) to advance studies in specific realms of chemical engi -neering. The option also offers exposure to design elements through three  distinct lab courses that entail hands-on, open-ended projects relevant to  current research so students can innovatively apply chemical engineering  concepts. In their fourth year, students can also pursue a senior thesis to  explore research topics under the mentorship of a chemical engineering  professor and gain experience in proposing a research plan, applying rel -evant lab techniques, and presenting results through an oral presentation  and a written thesis. More information on the option requirements and  individual tracks can be found on: https://www.cce.caltech.edu/under -graduate/undergraduate-chemical-engineering .The option™s breadth enables its students to take on a wide variety  of fields upon graduation, such as the manufacturing of both organic  products (polymers, films, hydrocarbon fuels, and pharmaceuticals) and  inorganic products (semiconductors and ceramics), as well as the develop -ment of sustainabletechnologies (energy efficiency, pollution management,  climate mitigation, biofuels) and novel biotechnologies (enzyme engineer-ing, cell culturing, foodmanufacturing), in both industrial, consulting, and  academic settings.Freshmen normally take the core courses in mathematics, physics,  chemistry, and biology (Ma 1 abc, Ph 1 abc, Ch1 ab, and Bi 1), as well as  general chemistry laboratory (Ch3a [or Ch 3x]).Graduation Requirements 266Sophomores take ordinary differential equations (Ma 2), wave physics  (Ph 2a), and organic chemistry laboratory (Ch/ChE 9). They also take the  second-year organic chemistry course Ch 41 abc, and the basic chemical  engineering courses (ChE 15, ChE 62, and ChE 63 ab). The third-year  applied and computational mathematics course (ACM 95 ab) may be  taken in the junior or sophomore years.  Undergraduate research is emphasized, and students are encouraged,  even in the freshman year, to participate in research with the faculty. In  order to obtain a basic intellectual background, all students take courses  in the fundamentals of chemical engineering through the junior year. During  the junior and senior years, students diversify into one of five tracks (bio-molecular, environmental, materials, process systems or computational),  where they pursue concentrated study in their chosen area of chemical  engineering. An optional senior thesis provides an opportunity to pursue  independent research and design in lieu of one of the senior laboratories. Attention is called to the fact that any student whose gradepoint aver-age is less than 1.9 at the end of an academic year in the subjects listed  under the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering may, at the  discretion of the faculty in this division, be refused permission to continue  the work in this option.ChE Option Requirements 1. Ma 2, Ph 2 a, Ch/ChE 9, ChE 15, Ch 21 ab ƒ, Ch 41 abc, ChE 62,  ChE 63 ab, Ch/ChE 91 (or En/Wr 84), ACM 95 ab, ChE 101, ChE  103 abc, ChE 105, ChE 126, and one of [Ec 111, BEM 102, or BEM  103]1.2. Completion of a track (biomolecular, sustainability, process sys -tems, materials or computational), each consisting of at least 72  units of science or engineering courses. Students should inform the  executive officer of their track choice by the beginning of the spring  quarter of the sophomore year by providing a planned schedule for  completion of all degree requirements. Requirements for the tracks  are as follows.  a. Biomolecular track: ChE/BE 163, Ch/Bi 110, [ChE 130    or ChE 90 c], and additional units of bioengineering or  biochemical  engineering electives or approved related courses. 3,4 b. Sustainability track: two of  [ChE/ESE/ME/MS 111, ESE 101,  ESE 102, ESE 103], one of [ChE 128 ChE 90 c, Ge 114 a], and  additional units of 100 level ESE electives, 100 level EST electives  or approved related courses. 3,4,5 c. Process systems track: ChE 118, ChE 120, [ChE 128 or  ChE 90 c], and additional units of engineering electives, courses from the other tracks, or approved related  courses.3 d. Materials track: [ChE 128 or ChE 90 c]; one course on materials  synthesis or processing selected from [Ch 102, Ch 117, Ch/ChE  147, ChE 115, or MS 133]; at least one course on the physical basis of structure and properties selected from [Ch 120,  ChE/Ch 148, MS 115, MS/APh 122, MS 131, or MS 132]; and addi-tional units of chemical engineering, materials science, or applied  physics elective courses selected from [ChE/Ch 155, ChE/Ch164,  Undergraduate Information 267ChE/Ch 165, APh 109, APh 114 ab, any MS course]or approved  related courses. 3,43.  e. Computational track: ACM/IDS 104, ChE 141, at least one  course sequence from [Ch 121 ab; BE 163 & BE 191  a; ESE 101  & ESE 136; Ae 232 ab; or ChE 90 abc], and additional units from  ChE 142 or approved courses in IDS, ACM, CS or related options. 34. Passing grades must be earned in all courses required by the  Institute and the option. None of the courses satisfying option  requirements may be taken pass/fail (except when courses are only  available P/F)5. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  courses listed above.ƒ PH 12 B may substitute for Ch 21 a.1 The 9 units of Ec 11 or BEM 103 partially satisfy the Institute requirements in humanities and  social sciences. BEM 102 does NOT count for Institute core social science course. 2  Course is not typically offered every academic year. 3 No more than 18 units of [ChE 90ab or ChE 80] may count as track electives. 4 ChE 118 and/or ChE 120 may be elected provided the design project undertaken contains a  significant component relevant to the track. 5 students in the sustainability track are encouraged to take one policy-related course [BEM/Ec/ ESE 119 or ME/EE/EST 117] as a track elective.ChE Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 2  -tions9--Ph 2 aSophomore Physics:  Waves 9--Ch/ChE 9Chemical Synthesis andCharacterization--9for Chemical EngineeringCh 41 abOrganic Chemistry 99-ChE 62Separation Processes -9-ChE 63 abChemical EngineeringThermodynamics9-9ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math.-1212PEPhysical Education-3-HSS electives999Total 454239Graduation Requirements 268Third Year ChE 103 abcTransport Phenomena 999ChE 101Chemical Reaction Engi-neering-9-ChE 105Dynamics and Control of  Chemical Systems--9Ch/ChE 91 3--ChE track electives1999Ec 11 (or BEM 103 2nd term)9--HSS electives999Total 394536Fourth Year ChE 126 Chemical Engineering Lab9--ChE track electives118189Ch 21 abPhysical Chemistry99-HSS electives999Total 4536361 See option requirements.    CHEMISTRY OPTION AND MINOR (C h)The objective of the undergraduate option in chemistry is to produce  graduates articulate in the fundamental concepts of the molecular sci-ences through a combination of coursework and laboratory experienc -es. The chemistry program at Caltech provides depth in the traditional  areas of chemistryŠorganic and inorganic chemistry, chemical physics,  theoretical chemistry, chemical biology, and biochemistry. Breadth in  the program is found within the advanced coursework offerings and  the specialized interests of the faculty, which may include topics such  as: chemical synthesis and catalysis, chemical dynamics and reaction  mechanisms, biochemistry, bioinorganic, bioorganic, and biophysical  chemistry, and materials chemistry. Chemical research at Caltech is  highly interdisciplinary, reflecting the increasing importance of molec -ular understanding to many fields of science. Major initiatives are fos -tering broad collaborations in energy and  environment, molecular med -icine, and nanomaterials. The outcome of the undergraduate program  in chemistry is to prepare students for advanced graduate study and  ultimately careers in teaching and research at colleges and universities,  in research for government and industry, in the operation and control of  Undergraduate Information 269manufacturing processes, and in management and development posi -tions in the chemical industry. A first-year general chemistry course is taken by all freshman students.  The emphasis is on fundamental principles and their use in systematizing  descriptive chemistry. Ch 1 ab must be passed to satisfy the Institute  chemistry requirement. The student™s qualifications for placing out of Ch 1  ab will only be determined by the performance on a placement examina-tion to be administered in the summer prior to registration. The one-term  required laboratory course (Ch 3 a or 3 x) presents basic principles and  techniques of synthesis and analysis and develops the laboratory skills  and precision that are fundamental to experimental chemistry. Qualified  students, with the consent of the instructor and the option representa -tive, are allowed to substitute either Ch 4 a, Ch 8, or Ch/ChE 9 for the  core requirement of Ch 3 a. Freshmen intending to major in chemistry  are encouraged to take Ch 10 abc, which provides an introduction to  research activities and opportunities in chemistry for undergraduates. Beyond the freshman year, each student in the chemistry option, in  consultation with their adviser, selects a suitable course of study under the  supervision of the division. The requirements of the option are listed below.  A student wishing to deviate from these requirements should submit an  alternate curriculum, with justifications, for consideration by their adviser  and the Chemistry Curriculum and Undergraduate Studies Committee. The  chemistry option representative should be consulted for the future sched -uling of courses not offered during the current academic year. Undergraduates in the option must also take chemistry courses below  the 100 level for a letter grade with the exception of the following courses,  which are only offered on a pass/fail basis: Ch 1, Ch 3 a, Ch 90, and, if  taken during the first or second terms of the freshman year, Ch 4 ab, Ch  21 ab, and Ch 41 ab.Ch Senior ThesisStudents attempting a senior thesis in the chemistry option must complete  the following requirements. 1. Three terms (27 units) of Ch 82 are to be completed during the  junior and/or senior year of study; continued work from research  experiences prior to the commencement of the senior thesis is encouraged. 2. At the time of registering for the first term of Ch 82, the candi -date will submit a short (five-page) proposal delineating their  project for approval by the research mentor and the Chemistry  Curriculum and Undergraduate Studies Committee (CUSC). 3. The candidate will present a short progress report (maximum  of five pages) at the end of each of the first two terms of Ch 82, describing the current status of the research work and any  results obtained. Upon evidence of satisfactory effort, the stu -dent will be allowed to continue their senior thesis.4. A thesis of approximately 20 pages (excluding figures and ref -erences) will be presented to the mentor and the CUSC at the  end of the third term of Ch 82. An oral thesis defense will be  arranged by the CUSC. The thesis must be approved by both  the research mentor and the CUSC. Graduation Requirements 2705. Upon approval by the research mentor and the CUSC, the Ch 91  requirement for graduation may be satisfied by the written thesis  and the progress reports from the first two quarters of Ch 82. If  the thesis is being completed during the spring quarter of the senior year, a draft of the thesis is to be submitted by Add Day. Ch Double MajorsFor students simultaneously pursuing a degree in a second option, cours -es taken as required  courses for that option can also be counted as chem-istry electives (requirement 3, below) where appropriate. However, courses  that count toward the electives requirement in the other option cannot  simultaneously be counted toward satisfying the elective requirement in  chemistry. The courses listed below would constitute a common core for many  students in the option.Any student of the chemistry option whose grade-point average is less  than 1.9 will be admitted to the option for the following year only with the  special permission of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering.Ch Option Requirements 1. Ch 14, Ch 21ab, Ch 21 c or Ch 25, Ch 41abc, Ch 90, Ma 2, and Ph 2a. Ma 3 is recommended but not required. Students may  make the following substitutions: For Ch14 (Ch/ESE175); for Ch 21a (Ph 2b, Ph 12b, Ch 125a or Ph 125a); for Ch 21c (Ph 2c, Ph 12c, ChE/Ch 164 or Ph 127a). 100-level courses used in sub-stitution for these option requirements may not also be counted  towards the five terms of advanced electives.   2. A minimum of five terms of laboratory work chosen from Ch 4ab,  Ch 5ab, Ch 6ab, Ch 7, and Ch 15. One non-chemistry laboratory course may be used, chosen from MS 90, Ph 6 and Ph 7. One  term of research, either 10 c (if taken freshman or sophomore  year) or one term of Ch 82 (Senior Thesis), if taken for grades as the third and final term, may count for one of the five electives. 3. A minimum of five terms of advanced chemistry electives (which must total at least 45 units) taken for a letter grade from  chemistry course offerings at the 100 and 200 level, includ -ing cross-listed offerings, but excluding Ch 180 and Ch 280.  Students may petition to substitute up to but no more than one  100-level elective from another option, if the substituted course  has substantial chemistry content. Ch 101 cannot be used to meet the five term requirement but can be used to meet the 45  unit requirement for advanced electives. 4. Passing grades must be earned in the courses that constitute  the approved program of study, including those listed above.  None of the courses satisfying option requirements may be  taken pass/fail. The chemistry option strongly encourages students to engage in  academic year research, and up to 27 units each of Ch 80 and Ch 82  can count toward the 486-unit requirement. Undergraduate Information 271Ch Typical Course Schedule    Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ch 41 abcOrganic Chemistry 999Ma 2Sophomore Mathematics  9--Ph 2 aSophomore Physics  9--Ch 4 abSynthesis and Analysis of Organic and Inorganic  Compounds -99Ch 14Chemical Equilibrium and Analysis-9-Electives18-2118-2718-21Total 45Œ4836-4545Œ48Third Year Ch 5 aAdvanced Techniques of  Synthesis and Analysis-12-or Ch 5 b9--Ch 15Chemical Equilibrium and Analysis Laboratory 10--Ch 21 abc or Ch 21 ab, Ch 25Physical Chemistry999Ch 90Oral Presentation  -3-Ch/ChE 91 --3Electives17-2921-3633-36Total 45Œ4845Œ4845Œ48Fourth Year Ch 6 aPhysical and Biophys. Chemistry Lab -9-or Ch 6 b--9or Ch 7Advanced Experim. Methods in Bioorganic  Chemistry--9Electives45Œ4835Œ4826Œ48Total 45Œ4845Œ4845Œ48Graduation Requirements 272This typical program is not specifically required for graduation in  the option, nor is it in any sense a complete program. Students are  expected to work out individual programs suitable for their interests and  professional goals in consultation with their advisers. Several represen -tative programs, including sets of possible electives, are shown below.  These may well approximate choices by students who intend to do  graduate work in conventional areas of chemistry.  Suggested Representative Courses of Study for Those Intending  Graduate Work in Particular Areas of Chemistry  Second Year Third Year Fourth Year Inorganic  ChemistryCh 4 ab, Ch 5 a,  Ch 41 abc, Ch 102, Ma 2 ab, Ph 2 ab, HSS elective, other electiveCh 5 b, Ch 14,  Ch 21 abc, Ch laboratory,  Ch elective(s), Ch 80, Ch 90,  Ch/ChE 91, HSS electiveCh 6 a or 6 b, or Ch 15 Ch elec-tives, Ch 80, HSS electiveChemical PhysicsCh 4 ab, Ch 21 abc, Ch 6 ab, Ch 14, Ma 2 ab, Ph 2 ab, HSS electiveCh laboratory,  Ch 41 abc, Ch elective(s), Ch 80, Ch 90, ACM 95 abc,  Ch/ChE 91, HSS electiveCh 125 ab, Ch 15, Ch electives, Ch 80, HSS  electiveOrganic  ChemistryCh 4 ab, Ch 5 a, Ch 41 abc, Ch 102, Ma 2 ab, Ph 2 ab, HSS elective, other electiveCh 5 b or Ch 7, Ch 14, Ch 21 abc, Ch elective(s), Ch laboratory,  Ch 80, Ch 90, Ch/ChE 91, HSS electiveCh 6 a or Ch 6 b, Ch 15, Ch elec-tives, Ch 80, HSS elec-tiveBiochemistryCh 4 ab, Bi 10,  Ch 41 abc, Bi 9, Ma 2 ab, Ph 2 ab, HSS electiveCh laboratory,  Ch 7, Ch 14, Ch 21 ab, Ch 25 (or  Ch 21 bc), Ch 80 (or Bi 22), Ch 90,  Ch/ChE 91, Ch/Bi 110, Ch/Bi 111, Bi 10Ch 6 a or 6 b, Ch 15, Ch (Bi) electives, Ch 80 (or Bi 22), HSS electiveCh Minor Requirements The chemistry minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s  undergraduate degrees. It is designed for students who wish to broad -en their studies beyond their major to include chemistry. Students  Undergraduate Information 273completing the chemistry minor requirements will have the phrase  ﬂminor in chemistryﬂ added to their transcripts. 1. 18 units of organic chemistry, taken from Ch 41 abc. 2. 18 units of physical chemistry, taken from Ch 21 abc (or substi -tute as specified for the major). 3. 27 units of advanced chemistry electives numbered Ch 102 or  above, approved by their designated chemistry adviser or the  option representative. 4. 9 or more units of a chemistry laboratory course from Ch4ab, Ch  5 ab, Ch 6 ab, Ch7 or Ch15. No substitutions are allowed.  All courses to be applied to fulfill the minor requirements must be  taken for grades. Courses taken as part of the chemistry minor are  counted toward the total 486 units needed for Institute graduation  requirements. To enroll in the program, the student should meet and  discuss their plans with the option representative. In general, approv -al is contingent on good academic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for handling the heavier course load. Courses that are used to satisfy the Chemistry minor requirements cannot be used  to satisfy course requirements in another major.  COMPUTATION AND NEURAL SYSTEMS OPTION (CNS) Aims and ScopeThe undergraduate CNS option provides a foundation in math, physics,  biology and computer science to prepare students for interdisciplinary  graduate studies in neuroscience and career paths that involve compu -tational applications inspired by properties of biological systems, such as  artificial intelligence and computer vision. By graduation, students will have  acquired knowledge in neurobiology, computation principles across differ -ent systems, methods used in modern neuroscience research, as well as  the ability to critically evaluate and understand neuroscience literature, and  be able to work in a team and communicate effectively.   To accomplish these goals, students are expected to complete a  series of math and physics courses to establish solid quantitative skills.  Then, they are expected to take two groups of courses, of which one has  a biology focus, while the other has a CS focus. Through these courses,  students are exposed to different sub-disciplines of neuroscience while  also acquiring the quantitative skills needed in graduate research and  industry jobs. Students will receive instruction in scientific communications  through SEC 10 and SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13, or Bi/BE 24. Undergraduate research is encouraged both during the academic year  and through participation in summer research programs. Students with a grade-point average lower than 1.9 will not be allowed  to continue in the option except with special permission from the option  representative. CNS Option Requirements 1. Fulfillment of extended core requirements in Differential Equations  (Ma 2 or equivalent); Probability and Statistics (Ma 3, Ge/ ESE 118 or equivalent); Waves (Ph 2a, Ph 12a or equivalent),  Graduation Requirements 274Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (Ph 2c, Ph 12c or  equivalent).2. Demonstration of competency in computer programming or com -puter science by taking CS 1, CS 2, and one of BE 103 and CS 3  or by taking an approved alternative course, or by passing a place -ment exam administered by the computer science option. 3. Bi/CNS 162 and 9 units of laboratory courses taken from the fol -lowing list: CS/CNS 171, CS/CNS 174, EE 45, EE 90, EE 91 ab, ME  72 ab, ME 50ab, BE 107, BE/EE/MedE 189 a, BE/CS 196a, Bi/BE  227, Bi/CNS/BE/NB 230.4. ACM 95 ab, or Ma 108 abc, or Ma 109 abc.5. SEC 10 and SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13; or Bi/BE 24.6. Bi 8, Bi 9, NB/Bi/CNS 150, Bi/CNS/ NB 157, Bi/CNS/NB 164.7. Choose five from the following list: EE 111, CS/CNS/EE 156 ab,  CS/CNS/EE 155, CS 159, CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187, BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191a, BE 150, IDS/ACM/CS 157.8. 45 units of electives chosen from either advanced EAS courses or  advanced science courses offered by BBE, CCE, GPS, or PMA  divisions.CNS Typical Course Schedule  Units per term1st2nd3rd First Year CS 1 Introduction to Computer  Programming 9--CS 2Introduction to Program -ming Methods-9-Freshman Humanities 999Freshman Core 272727Total 454536Second Year Ph 2 acWaves, Statistical Mechan -ics9-9Ma 2Sophomore Mathematics 9--Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics -9-ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math-1212EE 111Signals and systems9--Bi 8, 9Molecular, Cell Biology -99Undergraduate Information 275NB 150Introduction to Neurosci -ence--10HSS Electives999Electives99-Total 454849Third Year BE 103Data Analysis in Biological Sciences12--Bi 164Tools in Neurobiology 9--CS 156 aLearning Systems 9--Bi 162Cellular and Systems Neuroscience Lab -12-BE/CS 191 aComparative Nervous Systems-9-Engineering Lab--9HSS Electives999Electives91818Total 484836Fourth Year CNS 187Neural Computation9--CNS 186Vision: From Computational  Theory to Neuronal Mech -anisms-12-CS 159Advanced Topic in Machine  Learning --9SEC 10, SEC 11-133-3HSS Electives999Electives181818Total 393939Graduation Requirements 276COMPUTER SCIENCE OPTION AND MINOR (CS)Study in the computer science option within the Computing & Mathematical Sciences department emphasizes rigor and creativi -ty, and is good preparation either for graduate study followed by a  research career, or for a variety of professional or entrepreneurial occu -pations. The option introduces students to the mathematical and engineer -ing foundations of the discipline. It provides considerable flexibility in  course selection, together with a capstone project giving an opportu -nity for independent work in an area of the student™s choice. Individual  programs will be worked out in consultation with faculty advisers (the  materials at cms.caltech.edu/academics/ugrad_cs may be helpful for this purpose). Any student in the computer science option whose grade-point average is less than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the subjects listed in the option requirements may be refused permission to contin -ue work in the option.CS Double Majors Students interested in simultaneously pursuing a degree in a second  option must fulfill all the requirements of the computer science option.  Specific courses that are explicitly required by both options only need  to be taken once. For example, if both options require CS 38, then it  can count for both. However, elective courses cannot be double count -ed. For example, requirement 4 must be fulfilled using courses that  are not simultaneously used for fulfilling a requirement of the second  option. To enroll in the program, the student should meet and discuss  their plans with the option representative. In general, approval is contin -gent on good academic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for handling the heavier course load.CS Option Requirements  1.  CS fundamentals. CS 1 or CS 1X; CS 2; CS 3; CS 4.2.  Intermediate CS. CS 21; CS 24; CS 38. 3. CS Project Sequence. One of the following:     a. An undergraduate thesis (CS 80abc) supervised by a CS  faculty member.     b. A project in computer science, mentored by the student™s  academic adviser or a sponsoring faculty member. The  sequence must extend at least two quarters and total at least 18 units of CS 81abc.    c. Any of the following three-quarter sequences. Each of the  sequences is expected to be available (nearly) yearly.     i. Databases: CS/IDS 121, CS 122, CS 123.    ii. Graphics: CS/CNS 171 and two other CS 17x courses. The   three courses can include a 9 or 12 unit CS81abc focused on    graphics, if approved by a CS faculty member for this    purpose.   iii. Learning & Vision: At least three courses chosen from    EE/CNS/CS 148, CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155, CS/CNS/EE   156 ab, IDS/ACM/CS 157, ACM/CS/EE/IDS 158, Undergraduate Information 277   CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159, CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186,   CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187, Ec/ACM/CS 112, including at least   one of 148, 156 b, 159, or 186.    iv. Networking & Distributed Systems: CS 141, CS/EE 145,    or EE/CS 147 combined with two courses chosen from     CS/IDS 142, CS/EE/IDS 143, and CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144.    v. Quantum & Molecular Computing: At least three     courses chosen from BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 ab, BE/CS 196 ab,    ChE 130, Ph/CS 219 abc.    vi. Robotics: At least three courses chosen from ME 115 ab,    ME/CS/EE 133 B, ME/CS/EE 134, EE/CNS/CS 148,   CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. 4.  Advanced CS. A total of 72 CS units that are not applied to  requirements 1 or 2 above, and that either (i) are numbered CS  114 and above or (ii) are in satisfaction of requirement 3 above.  Included in these units must be at least one of CS 122, CS 124, CS 137, CMS/CS/IDS 139, CS/IDS 142, CS/EE/IDS 143, CS/IDS 150 a, or CS 151. 5.  Mathematical fundamentals. Ma 2/102; Ma 3/103; Ma/CS 6a or Ma 121a. 6.  Communication fundamentals. SEC 10, and one of SEC 11-13. 7.  Scientific core electives. 18 units selected from the following  courses: BE 25, Bi 8, Bi 9, Ch 21 abc, Ch 25, Ch 41 abc, Ph 2 abc, or Ph 12 abc. Advanced 100+ courses in Ay, Bi, BE, Ch,  CNS, Ge, MedE, or Ph with strong scientific component can be  used to satisfy this requirement with approval from the option  representative. 8.  Breadth. In addition to all of the above requirements, 30 units in  Ma, ACM, or CS; 18 units in EAS or Ma; and 9 units not labeled PE, PVA or SA.  Units used to fulfill the Institute Core requirements do not count  toward any of the option requirements. Pass/fail grading cannot be  elected for courses taken to satisfy option requirements. Passing  grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including all courses  used to satisfy the above requirements. CS Typical Course Schedule    Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year 99-Ma 2, Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics  99-CS 1Intro. to Computer Programming 1 9--CS 2Intro. to Programming Methods 1-9-CS 4Fundamentals of Computer Program -9-Ma/CS 6 aIntro. to Discrete Math  9--Graduation Requirements 278CS 21Decidability and Tractability -9-CS 3 Intro. to Software Design  --9CS 38Introduction to Algorithms  --9HSS electives9-18Other electives--9Total 454545Third Year CS courses-99CS 24Intro to Computing Systems 9--CS project 999HSS electives999SEC 10Technical Seminar  Presentations  --3EAS/Ma courses999Other electives99-Total 454539Fourth Year CS courses99-HSS electives999EAS/Ma courses999Other electives18918Total 453636 1 Commonly taken during the freshman year. CS Minor The computer science minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s undergraduate degrees and is designed for students who  wish to broaden their knowledge beyond their normal major or who  may wish to pursue a graduate program involving computer science.  Students completing the computer science minor requirements will  have the phrase ﬂminor in computer scienceﬂ added to their transcripts.CS Minor Requirements  1. CS fundamentals. CS 1 or CS 1X; CS 2; CS 3. 2. Mathematical fundamentals. Ma 2; Ma 3; Ma/CS 6a or Ma 121a.3. Intermediate CS. CS 21; CS 24; CS 38.4. Advanced CS. 9 CS units numbered 114 or above that are not  Undergraduate Information 279applied to the above requirements and are not simultaneously  used for fulfilling a requirement of the student™s major option.  Pass/fail grading cannot be elected for courses taken to satisfy option requirements. Courses taken as part of the computer  science minor are counted toward the total 486 units needed  for Institute graduation requirements. To enroll in the program,  the student should meet and discuss their plans with the option representative. In general, approval is contingent on good aca -demic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for handling the heavier course load.CONTROL AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS MINORControl and dynamical systems (CDS) may be pursued as a minor con -centration by undergraduates who are taking degrees in science, math -ematics, or engineering. The CDS minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s normal undergraduate degrees and is designed for stu -dents who wish to broaden their knowledge beyond their normal major  or who may wish to pursue a graduate program involving control or  dynamical systems. Students completing the minor requirements below  in CDS will have the phrase ﬂminor in control and dynamical systemsﬂ  added to their transcripts and their graduating degree materials. CDS Minor Requirements Complete CDS 110 or CDS 131 and CDS 231 or CDS 232Complete nine additional units in CDS courses, chosen from  CDS 110, CDS 112, CDS 131, CDS 141, CDS 232, CDS 233, CDS 242, CDS 243, CDS 244.Complete a three-term senior thesis approved by the CDS fac -ulty. All CDS courses to be applied to fulfill the CDS minor requirements  must be taken for grades, and students must obtain a grade of B or higher. The senior thesis requirement may be satisfied by completing  a three-term senior thesis in the student™s major option but on CDS  subject matter, with the approval of the thesis topic by the CDS option  representative, or by taking CDS 90 abc. Courses that are used to satisfy the CDS minor cannot be used to  satisfy course requirements in the major options, with the exception  that CDS 110 may be used in EAS options where this is part of their  requirements (e.g., ChE, EE, ME) and the senior thesis requirement may  be used to satisfy requirements for major options that require a senior  thesis. Courses taken as part of the CDS minor are counted toward the  total 486 units needed for Institute graduation requirements. A typical course sequence would be to take either CDS 110 or CDS 232 in the junior year, followed by the remaining courses and the senior  thesis in the senior year. Alternatively, it is possible to take all require -ments in the senior year. In addition to the requirements above, CS 1  and CS 2 are highly recommended. Graduation Requirements 280ECONOMICS OPTION (Ec)The economics option provides students with an understanding of the  basic principles underlying the functioning of economic institutions. It offers a modern quantitative approach seldom available at the under -graduate level. The emphasis on economic principles and modern  methodology provides students with an excellent preparation for gradu -ate study in economics, as well as for professional work in the fields of  business, law, economics, and government.  The option is sufficiently flexible so that students can combine  their pursuit of economics with studies in engineering, mathematics,  or science. The core of the option consists of an economic theory  component, a data analysis component, an applied microeconomic  component, and a macroeconomic/growth component. Students are  strongly encouraged t supplement this  core  with additional electives  in economics, political science, and mathematics.  Expected learning outcomes from completing the economics option  include: a proficiency in applying economic models to understand eco -nomic institutions; a proficiency in analyzing field and experimental data to prove  causal relationships between economic variables, to test eco -nomic theories, and to predict economic outcomes; an understanding of the causes of regional and global long-term  economic growth as well as the causes and consequences of  economic crises throughout history; an understanding of the role of market prices in allocating  resources and affecting the distribution of wealth; an appreciation of strategic behavior and asymmetric informa -tion in economic and social interactions; andan appreciation of the role of technological change and politics  in shaping economic policies. Note: The official source on requirements for graduation is the Caltech  catalog from the year in which a student began studies at Caltech.  Please see the catalog online, from this and previous years, for infor -mation regarding the applicable option requirements. Ec Option Requirements 1. Ec 11.2. Theory: Ec 121 ab and PS/Ec 172.3. Data analysis: Ec 122.4. Applied microeconomics: one of Ec 105 or Ec 135. 5. Macroeconomics and growth: one of Ec 129, 130, or Ec 140. 6. Ma 3.7. 45 additional units of advanced economics and social science  courses. (Courses that are used to fulfill the Institute advanced  social science requirement [courses numbered 100 and above] will  also count toward this requirement.) Students may also take class -es from the following list in partial fulfillment of this requirement:  any BEM course except BEM 102; ACM 113 and ACM/EE/IDS 116.8. 45 additional units of advanced science, social science, math-ematics, and engineering courses. The requirement cannot be  Undergraduate Information 281satisfied by any course with a number less than 100.9. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  all courses used to satisfy the above requirements. 10. Writing/oral presentation courses: a scientific writing requirement  course, and a three-unit course in oral communication,  offered by any division (some options combine these two  requirements into one course, that can be taken to satisfy  this requirement), or En/Wr 84. The course used to satisfy this  requirement must be taken on grades. Ec Typical Course Schedule                            Units per term  1st2nd3rd Second Year     Ma 3Sophomore  Mathematics-9-Menu Course --9Ec 11Introduction to  Economics9--PS 12Introduction to  Political Science--9Electives 1 272727  Total 363645Third Year     Ec 105Firms, Competition, and Industrial Organization 9--Ec 121abTheory of Value 99-PS/Ec 172Game Theory-9-Ec 122Econometrics9--Electives 1 182745Total 454545Fourth Year     En/Wr 84 (or 3 unit course in oral commu -nication and a scientific writing requirement  course)--9Electives 1 454536Total 4545451 See option requirements 5 and 7. Graduation Requirements 282ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING OPTION (EE)The objective of the undergraduate program in Electrical Engineering at  Caltech is to produce graduates who will attain careers and higher edu -cation that ultimately lead to leadership roles in academia, industry, and  government in areas of rapidly advancing interdisciplinary technology  related to telecommunications, solid-state, robotics, information, com -puter and electrical systems.The program prepares its students for either graduate study, entre -preneurial careers, or research and development work in government  or industrial laboratories. It inspires them to undertake careers and pro -fessional practices that provide an opportunity to address the pressing  technological needs of society. It accomplishes this by building on the  core curriculum to provide a broad and rigorous exposure to the funda -mentals (e.g., math, science, and principles of engineering) of electrical  engineering. EE™s other program objectives are multiple. The program  strives to maintain a balance between classroom lectures and laboratory  and design experience, and it emphasizes the problem formulation, sys -tem-design, and solving skills that are essential to any engineering dis -cipline. The program is also intended to develop in each student self-re -liance, creativity, teamwork ability, professional ethics, communication  skills, and an appreciation of the importance of contemporary issues and  lifelong intellectual growth. For interested students, there are opportuni -ties to conduct research with a faculty member. Students electing this option normally choose to take the introductory  seminar EE 2 as a freshman-year elective. The formal study of electri -cal engineering begins in the sophomore year with courses such as,  Deterministic Analysis of Systems and Circuits, EE 44; Introduction to  Digital Logic and Embedded Systems EE/CS 10ab; semiconductor sen-sors and actuators, EE 40; the theory and laboratory practice of analog  circuits, EE 45; and then a course on feedback control systems, EE 113  or CDS 110. The junior year features the fundamentals of signals and  systems and digital signal processing, EE 111; random variables and  stochastic processes, ACM/EE/IDS 116; electromagnetic engineering,  EE 151; and an analog electronics laboratory, EE 90. In the senior year,  the student will be asked to demonstrate their ability to formulate and  carry out a design project through independent research or either a  senior thesis, EE 80 abc, or two courses selected from the senior project  design laboratory, EE 91 ab, and CS/EE/ME 75 c. In addition, the stu -dent throughout their studies and especially in the senior year, will have  a significant opportunity to take elective courses that will allow them to  explore earlier topics in depth, or to investigate topics that have not been  covered previously. (See the ﬁsuggested electivesﬂ section,  page 286.)A student whose interests lie in the electrical sciences but who wishes  to pursue a broader course of studies than that allowed by the require -ments of the electrical engineering option may elect the engineering and  applied science option.Attention is called to the fact that any student who has a grade-point  average less than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the subjects  listed under electrical engineering may be refused permission to continue  work in this option.Undergraduate Information 283EE Double MajorsThe electrical engineering option allows interested students to declare  electrical engineering as one of the majors in a double major pursuit. To  enroll in the program, the student should meet and discuss their plans  with the option representative. In general, approval is contingent on  good academic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for handling the heavier course load. For students simultaneously pur-suing a degree in a second option, courses taken as required courses  for that option can also be counted as EE electives where appropriate.  However, courses that count toward the electives requirement in the  other option cannot be simultaneously counted toward satisfying the  elective requirement in EE. To qualify for an EE degree, the student  would need to complete all option requirements. EE Option Requirements 1. EE 55, Ma 2, Ph 2 abc. Ph 12 abc can replace Ph 2 abc. 2. EE 2, SEC 10, one of SEC 11-13, EE/CS 10ab, EE 40, 44, 45, 90, 111 and ACM/EE/IDS 116.3. ACM 95ab.4. EE 151 or EE/CS/IDS 160.5. EE 91 or this requirement can be waived if a student completes EE  80 abc.6. In addition to the above courses, 72 units selected from any EE  course numbered over 100. 7. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  courses listed above. Courses used to satisfy requirements 1  through 6 must be taken for grades, unless they are only offered  pass/fail.EE Typical Course Schedule 1Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Œ Schedule 1 Ph 2 abcSophomore Physics  999EE 55, Ma 2, Sophomore  Mathematics 18--HSS electives1999EE 40Physics of Electrical Engineering-9-EE 44 Deterministic Analysis of Systems and Circuits 12--EE 45 Electronics Systems  and Laboratory--12Graduation Requirements 284EE 113Feedback and Control  Systems--9EE/CS 10 abIntroduction to Digital  Logic and Embedded Systems-66Electives9-Total 484245Second Year Œ Schedule 2 Ph 2 abcSophomore Physics 999EE 55, Ma 2, Sophomore Mathematics 18--HSS electives999EE 40Physics of Electrical Engineering-9-EE 44Deterministic Analysis of Systems and Circuits 12--EE 45Electronics Systems and  Laboratory--12EE 113Feedback and Control  Circuits --9ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math.-1212Electives-9-Total 484851Third Year Œ Schedule 1 SEC 10Technical Seminar  Presentations  3--one of SEC 11-13Written Communication -3-ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math. -1212HSS electives1999EE 151Electromagnetic Engineering --9EE 111Signals, Systems, and Trans -forms9--Undergraduate Information 285EE/CS/IDS 160Fundamentals of Information Transmission and Storage -9-EE 90Analog Electronics Project  Lab--9ACM/EE/IDS 116Introduction to Probability  Models9--EE electives999Total 394248Third Year Œ Schedule 2 SEC 10Technical Seminar Pre -sentation3--one of SEC 11-13Written Communication -3-EE/CS 10 abIntroduction to Digital  Logic and Embedded Systems-66HSS electives999EE 151 Electromagnetic Engi -neering--9EE 111Signals, Systems, and Transforms 9--EE/CS/IDS 160Fundamentals of Infor-mation Transmission and  Storage-9-EE 90Analog Electronics  Project Lab --9ACM/EE/IDS 116Introduction to Probabili -ty Models9--EE electives999Electives-9-Total 394542Fourth Year (for project) HSS electives1999EE 91 Experimental Projects  in Electronic Circuits 9--EE electives18189Electives-918Total 363636Graduation Requirements 286Fourth Year (for thesis) HSS electives1999EE 80Senior Thesis999EE electives18189Electives009Total 3636361 See Institute requirements for specific rules regarding humanities and social   sciences.2 See option requirements 5 EE Suggested ElectivesSuggested elective courses for the second, third, and fourth year for  various specializations within electrical engineering are given below.  Students interested in other areas of specialization or interdisciplinary  areas are encouraged to develop their own elective program in consul -tation with their faculty adviser. BioengineeringSecond Year: Bi 9, Bi 10, APh 17 abc. Third and Fourth Year: Ch/Bi 110, EE/MedE 114, EE/BE/MedE 185,  CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, BE/EE/MedE 189 ab.Communications and Signal Processing  Second Year: Selected from APh 17 abc, APh/EE 23, APh/EE 24,  Third and Fourth Year: EE 112, EE/Ma/CS 126 ab, EE/Ma/CS/IDS 127  ab, EE 128 ab, 164, EE/CS/IDS 160, 167, EE/CS 161, EE/APh 131, APh/EE 130, 132, Ma 112 a.Control Second Year: APh 17 abc. Third and Fourth Year: CDS 110, and selections from EE 112, EE 128  ab, EE 164.Electronic Circuits Second Year: EE 113, CDS 110, APh/EE 183. Third and Fourth Year: EE/MedE 114 ab, 124, EE 110abc, 153, EE/CS  119 ab, EE/CS/MedE 125, and selections from EE 112, EE/APh 180,  EE/CS 119, EE/CS/IDS 160, EE 128 ab.Microwave and Radio Engineering Second Year: APh/EE 23, APh/EE 24, APh 17 abc. Third and Fourth Year: EE 153, EE/Ae 157 ab, EE/MedE 114 ab, EE/ APh 131, APh/EE 130, 132, APh/EE 183.Optoelectronics Second Year: APh/EE 23, APh/EE 24, APh 17 abc. Third and Fourth Year: APh/EE 130, 132, APh 105 abc, APh 114 abc, APh/EE 183, APh/EE 190 abc, EE/APh 131, EE 153. Undergraduate Information 287Solid-State Electronics and Devices Second Year: APh 17 abc. Third and Fourth Year: APh/EE 183, and selections from APh 105 abc,  APh 114 ab, EE 153, EE/BE/MedE 185, EE/MedE 187.Robotics  ME/CS/EE 134 and two more courses from the following list:  ME/CS/EE 133 ab, EE/CNS/CS 148, CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, CDS 131, CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155.ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE OPTION (EAS)The engineering and applied science (EAS) option offers students  the opportunity for study in a wide variety of challenging areas of  science and technology by allowing each student to design a custom-ized course of study that has breadth, depth, and rigor similar to the  options listed above.The aim of the EAS option is to prepare students for research and  professional practice in an era of rapidly advancing interdisciplinary  technology. The program builds on the core curriculum to combine  individual depth of experience and competence in a particular cho-sen engineering specialty, and a strong background in the basic and  engineering sciences, with laboratory and design, culminating in a  capstone design experience. It strives to develop professional inde -pendence, creativity, leadership, and the capacity for continuing pro -fessional and intellectual growth. The first year of the four-year course of study leading to a Bachelor  of Science degree is common for all students of the Institute,  although freshman elective subjects are available as an introduction  to various aspects of engineering and applied science. At the end  of the first year, students who elect the EAS option are assigned  advisers as close to their expressed field of interest as possible, and  together with their advisers they develop programs of study for the  next three years. Beyond the Institute-wide requirements of physics,  mathematics, and humanities, the EAS option requires one year of  applied and computational mathematics and a prescribed number of  units selected from a wide variety of engineering and applied science  courses. Engineering design (synthesis), as distinct from analysis, is  considered an essential part of every engineer™s capability. Advisers  will expect students to select a sufficient number of courses that  place emphasis on design.Any student in the EAS option whose grade-point average is less  than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the subjects listed in the  option requirements may be refused permission to continue to work in  the EAS option.EAS Option Requirements Students who have elected the EAS option must either choose one of  the approved areas of concentration (see item 7 below), or by the end  of the third term of the sophomore year submit a written proposed  Graduation Requirements 288customized course of study and obtain approval for it from the EAS  option representative.  The course of study must include each of the following elements:1.  Fulfillment of core requirements in differential equations  (Ma2 or equivalent); Probability and Statistics (Ma 3, Ge/ ESE 118 or equivalent); Waves (Ph2a, Ph12a or equivalent),  Quantum Mechanics (Ph 2b, Ph 12b, Ch 21a or equivalent); Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (Ph 2c, Ph 12c, ChE 63, ME 11, Ch 21c or equivalent);2.  Demonstration of computer programming competency by taking  CS 1, or by taking an approved alternative course, or by passing  a placement exam administered by the computer science option  by first term of sophomore year.  a. 27 units of advanced EAS courses with the prefixes Ae,   ACM, AM, APh, CE, CS, CDS, EE, ESE, MS, or ME; and b.  27 additional units of either advanced EAS courses     or advanced science courses offered by the BBE, CCE, GPS,   or PMA divisions. 3. a.  9 units of laboratory courses taken from the following list:     APh 77 bc, Ae/APh 104 bc, CE 180, CS/CNS 171,174, EE 45,  53, EE 90, EE 91, MS 90, MS 125, ME 72 ab, ME 50 ab, ME  90 bc; and b. 9 units of additional laboratory courses either from the list in   3a or from EAS courses with the word ﬂlaboratoryﬂ in the   title, but excluding those courses for which freshman   laboratory credit is allowed. 4.  ACM 95 ab or Ma 108 abc or Ma 109 abc. None of these course sequences may be taken pass/fail. 5.  SEC 10 or equivalent; one of SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13 or equivalent.6.  Courses used to satisfy requirements 1Œ5 above must also sat -isfy a depth requirement, which must be met by a customized  schedule of requirements that is rigorous, has both breadth and  depth, and that includes a senior thesis or capstone design proj -ect, such as, but not restricted to, EE 80 abc, CS 80 abc, ME  90 abc, or two terms ofEE 91 ab. The student must submit a written proposal justifying their course selections, and  obtain the approval of, the EAS option representative by the end  of the third term of the  sophomore year.  7.  At least 117 units of EAS courses not including those used to satisfy requirements 4, 5, and 6 above.  8.  The customized schedule of requirements described in 7 shall  include a major design experience.9.  Passing grades must be earned in at least 486 units, including  those listed in requirements 1Œ8 above. ENGLISH OPTION AND MINOR (En)The option in english provides students with a broad and intensive edu -cation in the rich traditions of literature in english from the middle ages  to the present day, with a particular emphasis on british and american  Undergraduate Information 289writing. The english faculty expects undergraduate option students to  become familiar with a range of literary forms, genres, and styles of  expression; to understand how authors and texts can be shaped by  historical contexts; to appreciate differences in literary expression across  time periods and national traditions; to develop critical reading skills  through analysis and interpretation of literary texts; and to become effec -tive writers in matters of style, organization, and interpretive argument. During the senior year, and typically in the first two terms, English  option students enroll in En 99 ab (Senior Tutorial for English Majors) with  a faculty member chosen by mutual agreement. The Senior Tutorial intro -duces students to advanced methods in literary research and analysis  and provides an important means for assessing the progress of English  option students in the rigorous study of literary texts and contexts.  Students research, write, and revise a 25-30 page paper on a topic in  British or American literature; En 99 a is primarily a research term, and En  99 b is primarily a writing term. Both terms involve regular tutorial con -sultation with the faculty instructor. English option students should begin  considering a senior thesis topic in the third term of their junior year in  consultation with the option representative or option adviser.  In addition to the Senior Tutorial, the English option requires nine  courses, which must include at least one course in each of the follow-ing areas: British literature, American literature, and literature before  1850. All English option students are assigned an adviser who will  help select courses best suited to their needs and interests, including  where appropriate a limited number of courses in related fields such as  history, visual culture, and literature other than British and American.  Students should consult their option adviser in advance of registration  for each term. All courses counted toward the option must be taken for  grades except for a freshman humanities course in English when taken  in the first two quarters of the freshman year. Most students pursue English as a second option. The emphasis on  writing and on critical reading helps students develop communication skills  that can enhance their careers as scientists, engineers, and medical pro -fessionals. The English option also provides excellent preparation for those  seeking careers in law, business, and administration, and in any field that  involves extensive communication.En Option Requirements 1.  En 99 ab.2.  81 additional units of English courses numbered 99 and above.  27 of these units must include one course in British literature,  one course in American literature, and one course in literature  before 1850 (En 103, 110, 113, 118, 121, 122, 125, 127, 129,  188, 189, 190, and En/H 193, 197). Courses cannot be counted twice in meeting these distribution requirements. Up to nine  units of freshman humanities in English (courses cross-listed  Hum/En numbered 60 or below) and/or up to nine units of En  98 may be substituted for up to 18 of the remaining 54 English  units. Students may also substitute courses in foreign literature  (in the original or in translation) and/or, with authorization of the  adviser, related humanities courses numbered above 99, for up  Graduation Requirements 290to 18 of the remaining 54 English units. 3.  54 additional units of science, mathematics, and engineering courses. This requirement cannot be satisfied by courses listed  as satisfying the introductory laboratory requirement or by a  course with a number less than 10.4.  Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  the courses listed above. Courses used to complete the English option under categories 1 and 2 above may not be used to satisfy the requirements of another option  or minor. However, these courses may be used to satisfy core Institute  requirements in the humanities. English Minor RequirementsThe English minor is designed for students who want to pursue concen-trated study in English and/or American literature, without the extensive  course work and the senior thesis required by the English option.  English minors must take 72 units of English courses. These units may  include one freshman humanities course; they may also include one direct -ed reading course (En 98). Students wishing to do a minor in English must  declare a minor with the English option representative. All courses to be  counted toward the option in English must be taken for grades except for  a freshman humanities course in English when taken in the first two quar -ters of the freshman year. Students completing the English minor require -ments will have the phrase ﬂminor in Englishﬂ added to their transcripts.1.  72 units of English courses numbered 99 or above. 2.  Nine units of freshman humanities in English (courses cross-listed  Hum/En numbered 60 or below) may be substitute for any nine of  the 72 units required for the minor.  3.  Nine units of En 98 may be substituted for any nine of the 72 units  required for the minor.  Courses used to complete the English minor may not be used to sat-isfy the requirements of another option or minor. However, these courses  may be used to satisfy core Institute requirements in the humanities. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING  OPTION AND MINOR (ESE)The ESE major is intended to train students in the environmental sci -ences, to pursue careers in academia, the public sector, or the private  sector. The major can be pursued along two tracks: environmental phys -ics and environmental chemistry. These tracks have separate course  requirements and emphases, but at their hearts provide fundamental  training in core scientific disciplines, with specialization in applications to  the environmental and climate sciences. The two tracks share a sopho -more year that continues the Core Curriculum™s training in mathematics  and physics. Each track requires a laboratory component and training in  data analysis and statistics. All ESE majors must take three broad-based  classes (ESE 101, 102, and 103 ) providing introductions to atmospheric  and oceanic physics as well as marine and terrestrial biogeochemistry.  Undergraduate Information 291Graduation Requirements The physics and chemistry tracks initially parallel their respective majors  in the core disciplines. However, there are fewer required classes in the  ESE major to enable students to design a curriculum that emphasizes  the environmental sciences, after training in a core discipline. A total of  212 units are required for the major, leaving approximately nine classes  of free choice outside the major and the core.  Requirements for all ESE Majors, regardless of ‚Track™ Ma 2.Ph 2a OR Ph12a.  Training in data analysis and statistics: BE/Bi 103ab OR Ph 20 and Ph  21 OR ChE 15 and BE/Bi 103b.  ESE 101, ESE 102, ESE 103. If students have taken ESE 1 then they  can petition to not have either ESE 101 or ESE 103.Science Writing Requirement: Ch 91 OR Ph 70.  Oral Presentation Requirement: Ge109 OR Ph 70 OR Ch 90.  ESE 91. Senior thesis (Optional) .Chemistry Track Requirements: Ch 21ab, Ch 41ab, ESE/Ge 142, ESE/Ch 176, ESE/Ge/Ch 171.  Laboratory Requirement: Ch/ChE 9 OR Ch 4a; AND Ch 15.  At least 77 units of electives, with a maximum of 2 additional lab class-es. These courses are to be chosen by the student with approval  by the Option Representative or their assigned surrogate. It is  expected that the electives will span a range of options and con-stitute a coherent program in the Environmental Sciences.  Physics Track Requirements: Ph 12bc, Ph 106ab, ACM 95ab, ME 11c, ESE 130.  Laboratory Requirement: Ph 6.  At least 2 of the following 4 courses: ME/CE/Ge/ESE 146, ESE 131,  ESE 133, ME 119.  At least 77 units of electives. These courses are to be chosen by  the student with approval by the Option Representative or their  assigned surrogate. It is expected that the electives will span  a range of options and constitute a coherent program in the  Environmental Sciences. ESE Typical Course Schedules  Units per term   1st 2nd 3rd  Second Year Ma 2a9--ESE 1029--Ch 41ab99-Ch 4a-9-292Undergraduate Information ChE 15--10Ph 2a9--ESE 103-9-Electives--18 Total 362728Third Year ESE 1019--ESE 142--9ChE 159--BE/Bi 103b-9-ESE/Ge/Ch 171--9ESE/Ch 176-9-Ch 91--9Electives-9-Ch 21ab99- Total 273627Fourth Year  Electives999Electives999ESE 9099-Sr. Thesis --9 Total 272727ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING  MINOR (ESE)The ESE minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s under -graduate degrees. It is designed for students who wish to broaden  their studies beyond their major to include environmental science and  engineering. Students completing the ESE minor requirements will have  the phrase ﬂminor in environmental science and engineeringﬂ added to  their transcripts.293ESE Minor Requirements 1. Complete 27 units of ESE 1, 101, 102, or 1032. Complete 27 additional units of ESE courses (which may include up to 18 units of research under ESE 90, including the required  written report).  Except for research courses, all ESE courses to be applied to fulfill  the minor requirements must be taken for grades, and students must  maintain a minimum grade average of B- in this ESE coursework. Courses that are used to satisfy the ESE minor requirements cannot be  used to satisfy course requirements in the major. GEOLOGICAL AND PLANETARY SCIENCES (GPS)  (Geology, Geobiology, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Planetary Science) The aim of this undergraduate program is to provide thorough training  in the geological and planetary sciences and, wherever possible, to inte-grate these studies with courses in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and  biology taken during the student™s earlier years at the Institute. Active  involvement in research, particularly during the summer, is encouraged.  For geologists, field work is important because it provides firsthand expe-rience with geological phenomena that can never be satisfactorily grasped  or understood solely from classroom or laboratory treatment. Options are  offered in geology, geobiology, geochemistry, geophysics, and planetary  science. Electives permit students to follow lines of special interest in relat-ed scientific and engineering fields. Those who do well in the basic scienc-es and at the same time have a compelling curiosity about the earth and  the other planets are likely to find their niche in these options, especially  if they enjoy grappling with complex problems involving many variables.  Most students majoring in the earth and planetary sciences now pursue  further training at the graduate level.  Under the geobiology option, a student can be associated with either  the biology or the GPS division. This association formally will only affect  which course the students elect to satisfy the Institute-wide oral presenta -tion requirement; all other geobiology option requirements are independent  of GPS or biology affiliation. In practice, however, we expect that students™  affiliation with one division or another will significantly shape their choice of  elective courses.For students beginning their junior year, it is possible to complete the  requirements for geochemistry, geophysics, and planetary science options  within two years, but there are benefits from starting with the Ge 11  sequence in the sophomore year. Because Ge 120 ab may not be offered  every year, students in the geology option may also need to take Ge 106  and Ge 120 a in winter and spring term of their sophomore year in order to  prepare for Ge 120 b the following summer. GPS Double MajorsFor students simultaneously pursuing a degree in a second option, cours -es taken as required courses for that option can also be counted as Ge  electives where appropriate. However, courses that count toward the elec -tives requirement in the other option cannot simultaneously be counted  toward satisfying the elective requirement in GPS. Graduation Requirements 294GPS Option Requirements Geology Option Requirements1. Ge 11 ab, Ge/Ay 11 c or Ge 11 d 1, and any writing class and oral presentation class that satisfies the Institute scientific  requirements 2.2. Ma 2 and one choice from: Ma 3, Ge/ESE 118, or Ge/Ay 117. 3. Ph 2 a or Ph 12, a plus an additional quarter of sophomore-level  physics (Ph 2 b, 2 c, 12 b, or 12 c).4. Either ACM 95 ab or the combination of a full-year chemistry sequence (Ch 41 abc or Ch 21 abc).5. Ge 106, 114 ab, 115 ab, 120 ab3.6. Ge 111 ab or Ge 11 d.7. Ge 112 or Ge 125.8. Elective courses in Ge or cross-listed with Ge to bring the total  option units up to 210 (selected in consultation with adviser and approved by the option representative).  1 No class may be used to simultaneously satisfy more than one of these requirements. 2 For example, SEC 10 and one of SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13, or can be satisfied by En/Wr 84. 3 If Ge 120b is not offered, a suitable 3-5 week field camp may be substituted. GPS Typical Course Schedules Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 2 & 3Sophomore mathematics  99-Ph 2 a & c Sophomore physics  9- 9Ge 11 abc Intro. To Earth and Planetary  Sci. 999Ge 106Intro. to Structural Geology -9-Ge 120aField Geology Intro. --9HSS electives 999Total 363636SummerGe 120 bField Geology Camp--15Third year ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math.-1212Ge 112Sedimentology and Stratig-raphy 12--Ge 114 abMineralogy 12--Undergraduate Information 295Ge 115 aPetrology and Petrography   -9-Ge 111 abApplied Geophysics-69HSS electives 999Total 333630Fourth Year Geology electives999Ge 115 bPetrology and Petrography -9-HSS electives 999 --3SEC 10Oral Presentation --3Total 182724Geobiology Option Requirements 1.  Ge 11 abc.2.  Bi 8, 9.3.  Ma 2 and one course in statistics and data analysis (Ma 3, Bi/CNS/NB 195, Ge/Ay 117, or Ge/ESE 118). 4.  Two quarters of sophomore-level physics (Ph2a, b, c, or 12a, b, or  c).5.  Ch 41 abc and Ch/Bi 110.6.  Any writing class that satisfies the Institute scientific writing  requirement  1; or Bi 24.7.  At least 9 units of laboratory instruction from: Bi 10, Ch 7, Ch 8, Ch  15, Ge 116, or Ge 120ab2.8.  Any six courses from the geobiology core: Bi 117, Bi 122, ESE/Bi  166, ESE/ Bi 168, Ge/ESE/Bi 178, Ge 112, Ge/ESE 143, or Ge 124  ab.9.  27 units of geobiology electives in geology, biology, chemistry, and/ or environmental engineering to be chosen in consultation with  adviser3. 1For example, one of SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13 or En/Wr 84; with the approval of their adviser, stu -dents may also petition to do independent writing with a faculty member under Ge 40.2May also be satisfied by units from other courses that have a laboratory component, or substitute  thesis research or independent laboratory research, all with approval of option representative. 3May include any courses listed above that are not being used to fulfill a separate requirement.   Units per term  1st2nd3rd Second Year     Ma 2 & otherSophomore mathematics  99-Ph 2 a, c Sophomore physics  9- 9Graduation Requirements 296Ge 11 abcIntro. to Earth and Planetary  Sci. 999Bi/BE 24Writing and oral presentation --6Bi 8Introduction to Molecular  Biology-9-Bi 9Cell Biology --9Bi 10Cell Biology Laboratory --6 HSS electives999  Total 363648Third Year Ch/Bi 110Intro. to Biochemistry 12--Ge 124 abPaleomagnetism--15  -3-Ch 41 abc Organic Chemistry 999HSS electives999Geobiology electives-9-Total 303042Fourth Year ESE/Bi 166Microbial Physiology 9--ESE/Bi 168Microbial Metabolic Diversity -9-Ge/ESE/Bi 178Microbial Ecology  --9Ge 143Organic Geochemistry --9Bi 122Genetics9--Ge 112Sedimentology and Stratig-raphy 12--Ge 116Analytical Laboratory Tech -niques-9-HSS electives999Geobiology electives--9Total 392736Geochemistry Option Requirements 11. Ge 11 ab, Ge/Ay 11 c or Ge 11 d, Ge 109, and a science writing  course.22. Ma 2 and one choice from: Ma 3, Ge/ESE 118, Ge/Ay 117, Ph 2c,  or Ch 21c.Undergraduate Information 2973. Ph 2 a or Ph 12 a plus an additional quarter of sophomore-level  physics (Ph 2 b, Ph 2 c, Ph 12 b, or Ph 12 c).4. Either ACM 95 ab or the combination of a full-year chemistry sequence (Ch 21 abc or Ch 41 abc) plus Ge/ESE 118.5. Three courses from the list below:  Ge 114 ab (counts as one course), Ge 116, Ge 140 a, Ge 140 b, Ge/ESE 140 c, Ch 21 a, Ch 41 a, ESE/Ge/Ch 171, Ge/ESE 143, Ge/ESE 149. 6.  A total of 105 units from this and item 5 that include at least four  courses in the Ge-option: Ch electives: Ch 4 a, b, Ch 5 a, b, Ch 6 a, b, Ch 7, Ch 8, Ch/ChE 9, Ch 14, Ch 15, Ch 21 b, c, Ch 41 b, c, Ch 102. ChE elec-tives: ChE 63 a, b. ESE electives: ESE 103, ESE/Ge 142, Ge/ESE 154, ESE/Ge/Ch 171, ESE/Ge/Ch 172, ESE/Ch 176, ESE/Ch 177. Ge electives: Ge 40, Ge 106, Ge 112, Ge 115 a, b, Ge 120 a, b, Ge/Ch 127, Ge/Ch 128, Ge/Ay 132, Ge/ESE 143, Ge/ ESE 149, Ge 191, Ge 212, Ge 214, Ge 215, Ge 217, Ge 218, Ge 219. APh electives: APh 17 a, b, c, APh/MS 105 abc. MS elec-tives: MS 105, MS 115, MS 125, MS 131, MS 133, MS 142, MS/ME 161. 1 No class may be used to simultaneously satisfy more than one of these requirements.  2 For example, SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13, or En/Wr 84.  Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ge 11 abcIntro. to Earth and Planetary  Sci.999 --3Ge 109Oral Presentation (GeCh  option)--6Geochemistry core or electives 999Ph 2 abSophomore Physics  99-Ma 2 & otherSophomore Mathematics 99-HSS electives999Total 454533Third Year ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math.-1212Graduation Requirements 298HSS electives999Geochemistry core or electives 181818Total 273939Fourth Year HSS electives999Geochemistry electives999Total 181818  Geophysics Option Requirements 1. Ge 11 a, Ge 11 b or Ge 11/Ay c, SEC 10 and a science writing  course.12. Ge 111 ab, Ge 11 d3. Ph 2 a or Ph 12 a, Ph 2b or 12b, and one of the following: BE 25, Ph 2c, Ph 12c, ME 11a, APh 17a, Ch 21c, Ch 25.4. Ma 25. One of Ma 3, Ge/Ay 117, Ge/ESE 118 6. ACM 95 ab7. 36 units of advanced science courses selected in consulta-tion with adviser and approved by the option representative.  Appropriate choices include (but are not limited to): up to 18  units of Me 11 and 12, ME 65, 66, AM 125 abc, Ae/Ge/ME 160, Ph 106 abc, MS 115, MS 133, MS/ME/MedE 116.8.  36 units of geophysics electives (selected in consultation with  adviser and approved by the option representative). Appropriate  choices include (but are not limited to): up to 9 units of Ge 40 and  Ge 41abc, Ge 161Œ168, Ge 261, Ge 263, ME/Ge/Ae 266ab. 1 For example, SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13, or En/Wr 84. Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ge 11 abcIntro. to Earth and Planetary  Sciences999 --3SEC 10Oral Presentation --3Ph 2 abcSophomore Physics  999Ma 2 & Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics 99-HSS electives999Total 363633Undergraduate Information 299Third Year ACM 95 abIntro. to Methods of Applied  Math.-1212Advanced Science Electives999HSS electives999Ge 111 abApplied Geophysics Seminar -69Ge 11 d Geophysics-9-Total 184539Fourth Year Geophysics electives18189HSS electives 999Total 272718Planetary Science Option Requirements 1. Ma 2 and one of Ma 3, Ge/Ay 117, or Ge/ESE 118.  2. Ph2 a or 12 a, Ph 2 b or 12 b, and one of the following: Ph 2 c, Ph 12 c, APh 17 a, Ch 21 c, Ch 25, ME 11 a.3. Ge 11 ab, Ge/Ay 11 c, 3 units of oral presentation (e.g., SEC 10),  and a science writing course.14. ACM 95 ab.5. 45 units of advanced science courses selected in consultation with adviser and planetary science option representatives.  Appropriate choices include (but are not limited to): Ae/APh/ CE/ ME 101 abc, Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab, Ch 21 abc, Ph 101, 106 abc, 125 abc, Ge/ESE 118, ME 12 abc, APh 17 abc, Ay 20, 21, 101,  102, ChE 63 ab, Ch 6 ab, CS 1-3, Ma 112 ab, ME 11 abc, 65, 66, AM 125 abc.6. 63 units of planetary science elective courses selected in consul-tation with adviser and planetary science option representative.  Appropriate choices include (but are not limited to): Ge 11 d, Ge  40, 41, 102, Ay/Ge 107, Ge/Ay 117, Ge/Ch 128, Ge 131, Ge/Ay  132, Ge/Ay 133, Ge/Ay 137, Ge/Ay 159, ESE 101-103, Ge/ESE  150, Ge 151, Ge/EE/ESE 157 c, ESE 130, Ge/ESE 139.  1 For example, SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13, or En/Wr 84.      Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ge 11 abcIntro. to Earth and Planetary  Sci.999Graduation Requirements 300 --3Ph 2 abcSophomore Physics  999Ma 2, 3Sophomore Mathematics 99-HSS electives999Total 363630Third Year ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math.-1212HSS electives999Advanced science999Planetary science999Total 273939Fourth Year HSS electives999Planetary science999Additional advanced/planetary science999Total 272727GPS Division Minor Requirements The minors in the GPS Division are intended for non-GPS undergradu-ates to supplement a major degree with knowledge of earth and plan-etary science. Students may complete a minor in either Geobiology, Geochemistry, Geology, Geophysics, Planetary Sciences or a general GPS minor, and will have the phrase ﬂminor in [the appropriate option]ﬂ added to their transcript. Any student interested in a minor in GPS is urged to contact the appropriate option representative in the division.1. Ge 11 a and Ge 11 b.2. One of Ge/Ay 11 c or Ge 11 d. 3.  27 units of 100-level or higher GPS courses, excluding Ge 109,  which must be approved by the appropriate option representative. HISTORY OPTION AND MINOR (H) Students who choose the history option will learn how to  do historyŠhow to think critically about past societies and their development, how  to read evidence closely, and how to express arguments in writing. With  the guidance of a faculty adviser in history, students taking the option  will explore the range of human experience in the realms of politics, cul -ture, religion, and economics, as well as science and technology. They  will learn both to challenge and revise existing historical narratives and  Undergraduate Information 301question their own ideas and assumptions about the past. Students will  develop the writing skills that will enable them to use historical sources  to make effective arguments, and they will receive extensive feedback  on their writing from their adviser and from other faculty members. The history option thus provides science and engineering students  with an important supplement to the scientific training and technical  skills they acquire in other courses and options. It will help them to  understand the world of human beings and human behavior outside  of science with which they will interact and which their scientific work  will affect; to set themselves and their work as scientists and engineers  in this wider context; and to communicate what they are doing to a  wider public as well as to their colleagues. In addition, it offers excellent  preparation for careers in business, administration, law, journalism, or  public affairs, as well as a solid foundation for graduate work in history.  History majors must take at least 99 units of history courses (which may include a freshman humanities course in history) during their four  years as undergraduates. Of these, 27 must be in the senior tutorial  (H 99 abc). All courses to be counted toward the history option must  be taken for grades except for a freshman humanities course in his -tory when taken in the first two quarters of the freshman year. History  majors may also choose to take one term of H 98, an individual pro -gram of directed reading that will allow students to explore areas of  history not covered by regular courses. Each history major will choose an area of concentration in consul -tation with their adviser and the history option representative. These  areas might include, but are not restricted to, fields such as ancient his -tory, medieval Europe, early-modern Europe, modern Europe, Russian  history, American history pre- 1865, American history post-1865, ear -ly-modern history of science, modern history of science, or economic  history. A student must take 63 units of courses in this area; 27 of  these units must be in the senior tutorial H 99 abc. In the senior tutorial, students will have the opportunity over the course of three terms to explore in depth an historical subject of partic -ular interest to them, while working one-on-one with a member of the  history faculty. They will learn how to carry out historical research, in  libraries as well as on-line, and engage critically with both primary and secondary historical sources. Finally, they will learn, under the direct  supervision of their faculty mentor, to organize and to write an exten -sive research paper, of at least 30 pages, that makes an original, clear  and persuasive scholarly argument. In H 99a, students will carry out  general research in their area of interest, and identify the specific topic  on which they wish to write. In H 99b they will learn to frame a research  question, carry out independently the necessary research to answer  it, and generate an outline of their paper. In H 99c they will write and  revise their paper in response to feedback from their faculty mentor. Each student must take the remaining 36 units of history required by  the option in areas other than the area of concentration, again defined  in consultation with their adviser and the history option representative.  These areas may include not only fields within the discipline of history  proper, but also useful cognate fields such as economics, political sci -ence, anthropology, law, English, or a foreign language.  Graduation Requirements 302A student considering the history option when they come to Caltech  will be well advised to take a freshman humanities course in history  (courses cross-listed Hum/H numbered 60 or below). In the sophomore  year, the student should take upper-level history courses, but this is also  a good time to pursue the study of English or philosophy, to begin or  continue a foreign language, and to do introductory work in the social  sciences. A student will normally make a commitment to an area of con -centration early in the junior year. At the beginning of the senior year, a  history major will enroll in H 99 abc with a faculty member in their area of  concentration. H Option Requirements 1. H 99 abc.2. 72 additional units of history courses numbered 99 or above.  Up to nine units of freshman humanities in history (courses  cross-listed Hum/H numbered 60 or below) and/or up to nine  units of H 98 may be substituted for up to 18 of these units.3. 63 of the total history units, including H 99 abc, must be in an area of concentration, as defined in consultation with the stu -dent™s adviser and the history option representative. 4. 36 of the total history units must be in an area or areas other  than the area of concentration, as defined in consultation with  the student™s adviser and the history option representative. H 99  abc may not be used to fulfill this requirement. 5. 54 additional units of science, mathematics, and engineering courses. This requirement cannot be satisfied by courses listed  as satisfying the introductory laboratory requirement or by menu  courses.6. Three units of oral communication. En/Wr 84 satisfies this  requirement, as do oral communication courses offered by other  options.7. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  the courses listed above.Courses used to complete the history option under categories 1, 2, or 3 above may not be used to satisfy the requirements of another  option or minor.  H Minor Requirements The history minor is designed for students who want to pursue concen-trated study in history without the extensive course work and the senior thesis required by the history option.  History minors must take 72 units of history courses. These units may include one freshman humanities course; they may also include  one directed reading course (H 98). All courses to be counted toward  the history minor must be taken for grades except for a freshman  humanities course in history when taken in the first two quarters of the freshman year. Students wishing to do a minor in history must declare  a minor with the history option representative. Students completing  the history minor requirements will have the phrase ﬂminor in historyﬂ  added to their transcripts. 1. 72 units of history courses numbered 99 or above. 2. Nine units of freshman humanities in history (courses cross listed  Undergraduate Information 303Hum/H numbered 60 or below) may be substituted for 3.  any nine of the 72 units required for the minor. 4. Nine units of H 98 may be substituted for any nine of the 725.  units required for the minor.   Students cannot use history minor requirements to satisfy a different  option or minor. HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE  OPTION AND MINOR (HPS)The history and philosophy of science option (HPS) provides students the  opportunity to explore the historical evolution of the sciences and the phil -osophical perspectives that inform them, as well as the dynamics between  science, technology, and other human endeavors. HPS courses in history help students learn about the origins of experi -mental practice; the social and institutional contexts of science; the origins  and applications of quantitative methods; specific developments since  antiquity in physics, biology, chemistry, geography and cartography, medi -cine; and biographical and comparative studies in these fields. HPS cours-es in philosophy deal with issues in causation and explanation; the foun-dations of probability and statistical inference; and philosophical problems  in particular fields such as biology, mathematics, medicine, neuroscience,  and physics. In their coursework, students receive regular feedback from  the faculty on their research, writing, and presentation skills. They have the  opportunity to carry out independent research, especially in their thesis  work, and present their findings in a seminar setting. This option thus aims to give students a broad, basic understanding of  how science is practiced and how that practice has changed over time.  Students learn to address questions such as: To what extent was the  scientific revolution revolutionary? What is a scientific explanation and  how do scientists go about constructing and justifying one? How have  conceptions of scientific experimentation changed? What are the ethical  issues raised by experimentation with human or animal subjects? How has  relativity theory changed our conceptions of space and time? The option  is designed to complement the regular science curriculum at Caltech,  offering students the opportunity to enlarge upon, and to contextualize, the  strong technical skills they acquire in other courses and options. Because of its emphasis on essay writing and formulating complex  philosophical and historical arguments, our curriculum provides training in  writing and communication skills that are increasingly vital today. The HPS  option provides excellent preparation for students going into law, business,  medicine, science journalism and public affairs, and it also prepares stu -dents for graduate work in the history and/or philosophy of science.HPS Option Requirements 1. Hum/H/HPS 18; HPS 102 ab; HPS/Pl 120; and HPS 103 (one quarter). (HPS 102 b fulfills the Institute science writing require -ment.)2. One advanced course in the history of science, chosen from  HPS/H offerings with a course number of 98 or higher; one  advanced course in philosophy of science, chosen from HPS/ Graduation Requirements 304Pl offerings with a course number of 98 or higher; and any four  courses in HPS. (No more than 9 units of HPS 98 may be count -ed towards the HPS major.) 3. 45 units of courses in science, mathematics, and engineering. This requirement cannot be satisfied by courses listed as satis -fying the introductory laboratory requirement or by a course with  a number less than 10.4. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  all courses used to satisfy the above requirements.  Courses used to complete the history and philosophy of science option under categories 1, 2, or 3 above may not be used to satisfy the requirements of another option or minor. We recommend that students intending to follow the HPS option  take Hum/H/HPS 18, Introduction to History of Science, as one of their  freshman humanities courses. Students making the decision to follow  this option in their sophomore year should take Hum/H/HPS 18 and  HPS/Pl 120, Introduction to Philosophy of Science, as early as possi -ble in that year. Students may also enter the option in their junior year  if they can complete the option™s requirements in time for graduation.  Please also note the following:Not all required courses are offered each term; students should  consult the current catalog to determine which terms required courses  are being offered, and should construct their course plan for the year  accordingly. We encourage students to choose their advanced social science  electives from among courses that will enlarge their perspective on  topics related to HPS (for example, Ec 118, Ec/SS 128, Ec 129, Ec 130,  PSY 101, PSY 115, PSY 125, PSY 130, PS 120, PS 121, PS 122, An 22).HPS 102ab, the Senior Research Seminar, may be taken in any two  consecutive terms in the Senior year. Students should coordinate with  their HPS adviser in determining their course schedule.HPS Typical Course Schedule First Year It is recommended that students intending to follow the HPS  option take  Hum/H/HPS 18 as one of their freshman humanities courses.  Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year HPS 181Introduction to History of Science 9--HPS/Pl 1201Introduction to Philosophy of  Science-9-Advanced HPS/history--9Undergraduate Information 305HPS 103Public Lecture Series  111Menu course--9Ec 11 or PS 12Introductory Social Science 9--Other electives273627Total 464646Third Year HPS 103Public Lecture Series  111Advanced HPS/history-99Advanced HPS/philosophy999Science, math, engineering999Advanced social science29--Other electives181818Total 464646Fourth Year HPS 103Public Lecture Series  111HPS 102 ab3Senior Research Seminar  -1212Advanced social science29--Science, math, engineering999Other electives271818Total 4640401 Not all required courses are offered each term; students should consult the current catalog  to determine which terms required courses are being offered, and they should construct their  course plan for the year accordingly. 2 We encourage students to choose their advanced social science electives from among cours -es that will enlarge their perspective on topics related to HPS (for example, Ec 118, Ec/SS 128,  Ec 129, Ec 130, PSY 101, PSY 115, PSY 125, PSY 130, PS 120, PS 121, PS 122, An 22)3 Finally, HPS 102 ab, Senior Research Seminar, may be taken in any two consecutive terms in  the senior year. Students should coordinate with their HPS adviser in determining their course  schedule.  HPS Minor Requirements The minor in HPS is designed for students who want to pursue con-centrated study in the field without the extensive course work and the senior thesis required by the HPS option. HPS minors must complete 72 units of HPS courses. Freshman  Humanities courses other than Hum/H/HPS 18 may not be counted  towards an HPS minor. Students wishing to do a minor in HPS must  declare a minor with the HPS option representative. Those completing  Graduation Requirements 306the HPS minor requirements will have the phrase ﬂminor in History and  Philosophy of Scienceﬂ added to their transcripts.5. 72 units of HPS courses numbered 99 or above. 6. 9 units of HPS 98 may be substituted for any 9 of the 72 unit required for the minor. 7. 9 units of Hum/H/HPS 18 may be substituted for any 9 of the 72 units required for the minor. Students cannot use HPS minor requirements to satisfy a different  option or minor. INFORMATION AND DATA SCIENCES (IDS) The information and data sciences are concerned with the acquisi -tion, storage, communication, processing, and analysis of data. These  intellectual activities have a long history, and Caltech has traditionally  occupied a position of strength with faculty spread out across applied  mathematics, electrical engineering, computer science, mathematics, physics, astronomy, economics, and many others disciplines. In the last  decade, there has been a rapid increase in the rate at which data are  acquired with the objective of extracting actionable knowledgeŠin the  form of scientific models and predictions, business decisions, and pub -lic policies. From a technological perspective, this rapid increase in the  availability of data creates numerous challenges in acquisition, storage,  and subsequent analysis. More fundamentally, humans cannot deal  with such a volume of data directly, and it is increasingly essential that  we automate the pipeline of information processing and analysis. All  areas of human endeavor are affected: science, medicine, engineering,  manufacturing, logistics, the media, entertainment. The range of sce-narios that concern a scientist in this domain are very broadŠfrom sit -uations in which the available data are nearly infinite (big data), to those  in which the data are sparse and precious; from situations in which  computation is, for all practical purposes, an infinite resource to those  in which it is critical to respond rapidly and computation must thus be  treated as a precious resource; from situations in which the data are all  available at once to those in which they are presented as a stream.  As such, the information and data sciences now draw not just upon traditional areas spanning computer science, applied mathematics, and  electrical engineeringŠsignal processing, information and communica -tion theory, control and decision theory, probability and statistics, algo -rithmsŠbut also a range of new contemporary topics such as machine learning, network science, distributed systems, and neuroscience. The  result is an area that is new, fundamentally different that related areas  like computer science and statistics, and that is crucial to modern  applications in the physical sciences, social sciences, and engineering.  The Information and Data Sciences (IDS) option is unabashedly mathematical, focusing on the foundations of the information and data sciences, across its roots in probability, statistics, linear algebra, and  signal processing. These fields all contribute crucial components of  data science today. Further, it takes advantage of the interdisciplinary  nature of Caltech by including a required set of application courses  where students will learn about how data touches science and engi -307neering broadly. The flexibility provided by this sequence allows stu -dents to see data science in action in biology, economics, chemistry,  and beyond.  In addition to a major, the IDS option offers a minor that focuses on  the mathematical foundations of the information and data sciences but recognizes the fact that many students in other majors across campus  have a need to supplement their options with practical training in data science. IDS Option Requirements 1.  Computer Science Fundamentals. CS 1 or CS 1X; CS 2; CS 21 or Ma/CS 6c; and CS 38.2.  Mathematical Fundamentals. Ma 2; Ma 3 or Ma/ACM/IDS 140a; Ma 108a; and Ma/CS 6ab or Ma 121ab. The analytical tracks of Ma1bc are strongly recommended. 3.  Scientific Fundamentals. 18 units selected from the following  courses:  BE 25, BE 153, Bi 8, Bi 9, Bi 117, Ch 21abc, Ch 24, Ch 25, Ch 41abc, Ph 2abc, or Ph 12abc. Advanced 100+ courses in Bi, Ch, or Ph with strong scientific component can be used  to satisfy this requirement with approval from the option rep -resentative, but cannot simultaneously be used to satisfy the  ﬁApplications Electiveﬂ requirement or the ﬁAdvanced Electivesﬂ  requirement. 4.  Communication Fundamentals. SEC 10; and one of SEC 11-13.5.  Information and Data Science Core Requirements.   a. Linear Algebra: ACM/IDS 104; ACM 106a. b. Probability: ACM/EE/IDS 116.   c. Statistics: IDS/ACM/CS 157.  d. Machine Learning: CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155 or CS    CNS/EE 156a. e. Signal Processing: EE/IDS 111 or ACM/EE/IDS 170.  f. Information Theory: EE/IDS 1606.  Applications Electives. At least 18 units from the following list:  Ay 119, BE/Bi 103 ab, BE/Bi 205,Bi/CNS/NB 162, Bi/BE/CS 183,  CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, ME/CS/EE 133b, ME/CS/EE 134, EE/CNS/CS 148, Ec/ACM/CS 112, Ec 122, Ec/PS 124, ESE 136, Fs/Ay 3, Fs/Ph 4, Ge/Ay 117, Ge 165, HPS/Pl/CS 110, SS 228.  Other courses that include applications of data science may be substituted with approval from the option representative.  Courses used to fulfill this requirement may not also be used to  fill the any requirement above 7.  Advanced Electives. At least 54 units from the following list:  IDS courses numbered 100 or above, CS/CNS/EE 156ab, ACM  106b, ACM 95/100ab, CMS/ACM/EE 122, CS 115, Ma 112 ab. Courses used to fulfill this requirement may not also be used to  fill the any requirement above. Courses used to fulfill requirements in the ﬁApplications of Data  Scienceﬂ and ﬁAdvanced Electivesﬂ requirements cannot be used to fulfill  the institute humanities and social sciences requirements. Units used to fulfill the Institute Core requirements do not count toward  any of the option requirements. Pass/fail grading cannot be elected for  Graduation Requirements 308courses taken to satisfy option requirements. Passing grades must be  earned in total of 486 units, including all courses used to satisfy the  above requirements. IDS Double MajorsStudents interested in simultaneously pursuing a degree in a second  option must fulfill all the requirements of the Information and Data  Sciences option. Courses may be used to simultaneously fulfill require -ments in both options. However, it is required that students have at  least 54 units of ﬂAdvanced Electivesﬂ and 18 units of ﬂApplications of Data Scienceﬂ that are not simultaneously used for fulfilling a require -ment of the second option, i.e., the requirements of the Advanced  Electives and the Applications of Data Science sections must be fulfilled using courses that are not simultaneously used for fulfilling  a requirement of the second option. Any proposal to replace these  courses must be discussed with the option administrator. To enroll in  the program, the student should meet and discuss their plans with the  option representative. In general, approval is contingent on good aca -demic performance by the student and demonstrated ability for han-dling the heavier course load.IDS Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year CS 1Intro. to Computer Programming  9--CS 2Intro. to Programming Methods  -9-CS 38Algorithms --9Ma 2Differential Equations 9--Ma 3Intro. to Probability and  Statistics-9-Ma/CS 6 abIntro. to Discrete Methods 99-ACM/IDS 104Applied Linear Algebra9--HSS Electives999Scientific Fundamentals-99Other Electives--9Total 454536309Third Year SEC 10Technical Seminar Presentations -3-CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155Machine Learning & Data Mining -12-One of SEC 11-13Written Communication  --3Ma 108 aClassical Analysis9--EE/IDS 111Signal-Processing Systems and  Transforms 9--IDS/ACM/CS 157Statistical Inference --9ACM/EE/IDS 116Intro. to Probability Models 9--HSS Electives999Advanced Electives999Applications Electives-9-Other Electives--9Total 454239Fourth Year ACM/EE 106 aIntro. Methods of Computational  Math.12--EE/IDS 160Fundamentals of Information Transmission and Storage -9-Advanced Electives999Applications Electives99-HSS Electives999Other Electives9918Total 484536IDS AdvisingStarting in the sophomore year IDS students will be assigned a faculty  adviser whom they should meet with regularly, typically once per quarter.  Students in the program are advised by faculty interested in the infor -mation and data sciences from across the institute. This includes all the  CMS faculty, as well as the following faculty that pursue data science-re -lated research and participate in IDS advising: Justin Bois, Fernando  Brandao,Shuki Bruck, George Djorgovski, Laura Doval, Frederick  Eberhardt, Federico Echenique, Babak Hassibi,Jonathan Katz, Victoria  Graduation Requirements 310Kostina, Heather Knutson, Tom Miller, Pietro Perona, Antonio Rangel,  Mark Simons,Omer Tamuz, Andrew Thompson, Matt Thomson, Victor  Tsai, David Van Valen, Zhongwen Zhan. Students seeking an IDS adviser  should contact the undergraduate option secretary at academics@cms. caltech.edu.IDS Minor Requirements 1.  Computer Science Fundamentals. CS1 or CS 1X; CS2; CS21 or Ma/CS6c; and CS38.2.  Mathematics Fundamentals. Ma 3 or Ma/ACM/IDS 140a, Ma/CS  6a or Ma 121a.3.  Information and Data Science Core Requirements.  a. Linear Algebra: ACM/IDS 104. b.  Probability: ACM/EE/IDS 116.  c. Statistics: IDS/ACM/CS 157.   d. Machine learning: CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155 or CS/CNS    EE 156a. e. Signal Processing: EE/IDS 111 or ACM/EE/IDS 170. 4.  Applications Electives. At least 9 units from the following list: Ay  119, BE/Bi 103 ab, BE/Bi 205, Bi/CNS/NB 162, Bi/BE/CS 183,  CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, ME/CS/EE133b, ME/CS/EE 134, EE/CNS/CS 148, Ec/ACM/CS 112, Ec 122, Ec/PS 124, ESE 136, Fs/Ay  3, Fs/Ph 4, Ge/Ay 117, Ge 165, HPS/Pl/CS 110, SS 228. Other  courses that include applications of data science may be substi-tuted with approval from the option representative. 5.  Advanced Electives. At least 9 units from the following list: IDS  courses numbered 100 or above, CS/CNS/EE 156ab, ACM 106b,  ACM 95/100ab, CMS/ACM/EE 122, CS 115, Ma 112 ab. Courses  used to fulfill this requirement may not also be used to fill the any  requirement above. Courses used to fulfill requirements in the ﬁApplications of Data  Scienceﬂ and ﬁAdvanced Electivesﬂ requirements cannot be used to fulfill  (i) a requirement for another major or minor; or (ii) the institute humanities  and social sciences requirements. Any replacement of these courses  must be discussed with the option administrator.   Pass/fail grading cannot be elected for courses taken to satisfy option  requirements. Courses taken as part of the data science minor are count -ed toward the total 486 units needed for Institute graduation requirements.  Typical course schedule A typical course sequence is to take CS 1 during freshman year; Ma/CS  6a, Ma 3, CS2 and CS38 during sophomore year; ACM/EE/IDS 116, ACM/ IDS 104, CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155, and IDS/ACM/CS 157 during junior  year; and EE/IDS 111 and the elective courses during senior year. INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES PROGRAM (ISP) The Interdisciplinary Studies Program (ISP) is an undergraduate option  that allows the student to create their own scholastic requirements,  under faculty supervision, and to pursue positive educational goals that 311cannot be achieved in any of the other available options. A student™s  program may include regular Caltech courses, research courses, cours -es at other schools, and interdisciplinary study courses (item 5, next  page). In scope and depth, the program must be comparable to a nor -mal undergraduate program, but it need not include all of the specific  courses or groups of courses listed in the formulated Institute option  requirements for undergraduates.  The Curriculum Committee, a standing committee of the faculty, has  overall responsibility for the program. In addition, each student has  their own committee of at least two advisers, two of whom must be professorial faculty. Application material may be obtained at the dean  of undergraduate students™ office or website. ISP Administrative Procedures and Guidelines 1. An interested student must recruit at least two professorial faculty  members representing at least two different degree-granting options  to serve as the ISP faculty committee. Each member of the faculty  committee must provide a letter that includes:  a.  Faculty name and department/division, and the discipline    they ﬁrepresentﬂ within the proposed ISP.  b.  Faculty™s assessment of the student™s ISP proposal,     including the proposed degree title, as it relates to that     faculty™s discipline.  c.  Faculty assessment of whether the student could choose   an existing degree-granting option with some acceptable    accommodations, rather than create an ISP. That is, does    this ISP enable something that could not be accomplished   in a single option or major/minor combination.2.  Send the ISP proposal (cover sheet, proposed curriculum, and  the aforementioned letters from professorial faculty advisers to the  dean of undergraduate students for review and approval. 3.  The dean of undergraduate students sends the ISP petition to the  Curriculum Committee for review and final approval. This contract  includes the agreed-upon content of the student™s program and the  methods for ascertaining satisfactory progress for those parts of  the student™s program that are not standard Institute courses. This  contract may of course be amended, but any amendments must be  approved by the committee of two and the Curriculum Committee.  Copies of each student™s contract and of all amendments thereto,  along with all ISP records for each student and their transcript, are  kept in the permanent files of the Registrar™s Office. Passing grades  must be earned in a total of 486 units. 4.  The progress of each student in the ISP is monitored each quarter  by the registrar, and any deviations from the terms of the contract  are reported to the chair of the Curriculum Committee. Standards  for acceptable progress and for satisfactory completion of the  terms of the contract are the responsibility of the Curriculum  Committee. When the Committee is satisfied that the terms of the  contract have been fulfilled by the student, it recommends the stu -dent to the faculty for graduation.5.  A plan of study may include special ISP courses to accommodate  Graduation Requirements 312individual programs of study or special research that falls outside  ordinary course offerings. In order that credit be received for an ISP  course, a written course contract specifying the work to be accom-plished, time schedule for progress reports and completed work,  units of credit, and form of grading must be agreed upon by the  instructor, the student, and the committee of two, and submitted to  the registrar prior to initiating the work in the course. ISP courses  are recorded on the student™s transcript in the same manner as are  other Caltech courses.6. ISPs are intended for multiyear programs. Accordingly, the  Curriculum Committee urges students contemplating an ISP to  submit their petition during their second year and will not normally  consider such petitions any later than the first term of the student™s  third year. MATERIALS SCIENCE OPTION (MS) The aim of the Materials Science option is to prepare students for  research, professional practice, or advanced study in a rapidly advanc -ing interdisciplinary field, focusing on the relationships between the  properties of materials and their internal structure and how this struc -ture can be controlled. The program builds on the core curriculum to  develop analytical competence and use it for individualized research,  culminating in a one-year senior thesis. Materials Science students develop professional independence, creativity, leadership, and the  skills for continuing professional and intellectual growth. The first year  of the four-year course of study leading to a Bachelor of Science  degree is common for all students of the Institute, although freshman  elective subjects are available as an introduction to various aspects of  engineering and applied science. At the end of the first year, students  who elect the Materials Science option are assigned advisers appro -priate for their expressed field of interest. Together with their advisers,  they develop programs of study for the next three years. Beyond the  Institute-wide requirements of physics, mathematics, and humanities,  the Materials Science option requires one year of applied and compu -tational mathematics and a prescribed number of units selected from a  wide variety of courses in science and engineering. An undergraduate  thesis is an essential part of the academic program. Any student in  the Materials Science option whose grade-point average is less than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the subjects listed in the option requirements may be refused permission to continue to work in the  Materials Science option.MS Option Requirements  1. Fulfillment of extended core requirements in Differential Equations  (Ma 2 or equivalent); Probability and Statistics (Ma 3, Ge/ ESE 118 or equivalent); Waves (Ph 2 a, Ph 12 a or equivalent),  Quantum Mechanics (Ph 2 b, Ph 12 b, Ch 21 a or equivalent);  Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (Ph 2 c, Ph 12 c or  equivalent).  3132. Demonstration of competency in computer programming or com -puter science by taking CS 1, or by taking an approved alternative  course, or by passing a placement exam administered by the com -puter science option.  3. 18 units of laboratory courses taken from the following list: APh 77  bc, Ae/APh 104 bc, CE 180, CS/CNS 171, CS/CNS 174, EE 45,  EE/CS 52 ab, EE/CS 53, EE 90, EE 91, ME 50 ab, ME 72 ab, MS  121, MS/APh 122, MS 125, MS 142, or from EAS courses with the  word ﬂlaboratoryﬂ in the title, but excluding those courses for which  freshman laboratory credit is allowed.  4. ACM/IDS 104 and ACM 95 ab, or Ma 108 abc, or Ma 109 abc.  5. SEC 10 or equivalent; SEC 11, SEC 12, SEC 13 or equivalent.  6. APh 17 ab or ChE 63 ab or APh/MS 105 ab.  7. MS 115 and MS/ME/MedE 116 and MS 90 (or other appropriate  laboratory in MS).8. At least 45 of additional units from the following list of restricted  electives: ACM/IDS 104, Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc, APh/MS 105 abc,  APh 114 abc, APh/EE 130, APh/EE 183, Ch 21 abc, Ch 120 ab,  Ch 121 ab, Ch 125 ab, Ch/ChE 147, ChE/Ch 148, CS 11, Ge 114  ab, ME 12 abc, MS 121, MS 122, MS 125, MS 131, MS 132, MS  133, MS 141, MS 142, Ph 125 abc. Substitution of courses may be  approved at the discretion of the option representative.  9. Senior thesis MS 78 abc. Passing grades must be earned in at least 486 units, including those  listed in requirements 1Œ9 above. MS Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year CS 1Intro. to Computer Programming 9- - Ma 2  9 - - Ma 3Intro. to Probability and Statistics - 9- MS 90Materials Science Laboratory- - 9MS 115Fundamentals of Materials Sci-ence9- - MS 116Mechanical Behavior of Materials- 9- Ph 2 abc or Ph 12 abcWaves, Quantum Mechanics and  Statistical Physics 999HSS Electives- 918Total 3636 36 Graduation Requirements 314Third Year ACM/IDS 104Applied Linear Algebra9- - ACM 95 ab Intro. Methods of Applied Math.  -12 12APh/MS 105 abc States of Matter999MS 131Structure and Bonding in Mate -rials-9 - MS 132 9-- MS 133Kinetic Processes in Materials - - 9HSS Electives999Lab Class99-Restricted Electives (from 11) - 99Total 45 48 48Fourth Year SEC 10 Technical Seminar Presentation  3-  - SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13 Written Communication  - 3- MS 78 abcSenior Thesis999HSS Electives 99 9 Lab Class9- - Restricted Electives 18 18 18 Total 4839 36 MATHEMATICS OPTION (M a)The mathematics option is designed to give students an understanding  of the broad outlines of modern mathematics, to introduce current  research and to prepare them for advanced work in pure mathematics  or related fields. Math students go well beyond the basics to study the  structures of algebra, analysis and geometry, as well as the rudiments  of combinatorics and set theory. Students learn to write coherent and  complete proofs of various assertions, to work out non-trivial examples  and to use computational tools. The schedule of courses in the undergraduate mathematics option  is flexible. It enables students to adapt their programs to their needs  and mathematical interests and gives them the opportunity to become  familiar with creative mathematics early in their careers. Some students  go to use their background in mathematics as an entry to other fields,  such as physics, computer science, statistics, economics, business, finance, medicine and law. 315Freshmen considering majoring in mathematics should be aware  that the department strongly recommends taking the analytical  track of Ma 1 bc. Any student whose grade-point average is less than  1.9 at the end of the academic year, in the subjects under mathematics  and applied and computational mathematics may be refused permis -sion to continue work in the mathematics options. Ma Option Requirements 1. Ma 2.  2. Ma 3 or Ma 140 a.3. Ph 2 bc or Ph 12 bc4. Ma 5 abc, Ma 10, Ma 108 abc, Ma 109 abc. 5. Ma/CS 6 a or Ma 121 a.6. Ma/CS 6 c or Ma 116 a or Ma/CS 117 a.7. 45 additional units of Ma numbered 110 to 190 or ACM num -bered 95 or above. Courses in other options with high mathe -matical content may be used to fulfill this requirement with the  approval of the undergraduate option representative for mathe -matics. Of these 45 units, at most 18 can be from courses other  than Caltech Ma courses. 8. Math majors must take two quarters (18 units) of a single course, chosen from the Ma course listings with numbers between 110  and 190, inclusive. In years where one of these courses is given  as a one-term course only, it cannot be used to satisfy this  requirement. These two quarters may include courses taken to  satisfy requirements 2, 5, 6 or 7.  9. Requirements 1Œ 6 may not be taken pass/fail unless completed  during fall or winter of freshman year or when the course is only  offered as pass/fail. 10. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  the courses listed above.Ma Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 2, 3Sophomore Mathematics  99-Ph 2 bc or 12 bc Sophomore Physics  -99Ma 5 abcIntroduction to Abstract  Algebra 999HSS Electives999Electives118918Total 454545Graduation Requirements 316Third Year Ma 10Oral Presentation  3--Ma 108 abcClassical Analysis 999Ma/CS 6 acIntroduction to Discrete Math -ematics9-9Ma 110-190/ACM 95+Advanced Mathematics999HSS Electives999Electives19189Total 484545Fourth Year Ma 11Mathematical Writing --3Ma 109 abcIntroduction to Geometry and  Topology 999Ma 110-190/ACM 95+Advanced Mathematics99-HSS Electives999Electives1181818Total 4545391 Includes courses completed to fulfill option requirements 5, 6 and 7. MECHANICAL ENGINEERING OPTION (ME)The objective of the undergraduate program in Mechanical Engineering  at Caltech is to produce graduates who will attain careers and higher  education that ultimately lead to leadership roles in academia, industry,  and government in areas of rapidly advancing interdisciplinary technol -ogy related to fluid, solid, thermal, and mechanical systems. The program prepares students for graduate school and profes -sional practice and inspires them to undertake careers that provide an  opportunity to address the pressing technological needs of society.  Specifically, the program builds on Caltech™s core curriculum to com -bine individual depth of experience and competence in a particular chosen mechanical engineering specialty with a strong background in  the basic and engineering sciences. It maintains a balance between classroom lectures and laboratory and design experience, and empha -sizes the problem-formulation and solving skills that are essential to  any engineering discipline. The program also strives to develop in each  student self-reliance, creativity, leadership, professional ethics, and  the capacity for continuing professional and intellectual growth. For  317interested students, there are opportunities to conduct research with a  faculty member. The outcome of the undergraduate program is to prepare the stu -dent to build on a fundamental education in physics, mathematics, chemistry, and biology and to apply those principles to the solution of  open-ended engineering problems; to design, analyze, measure, and  evaluate fluid, thermal, and mechanical systems; to work effectively as  part of a team; to communicate effectively; to apply ethical consider -ations; and to understand the broader impacts of engineering develop -ments, including societal, cultural and environmental concerns. Mechanical engineering is the branch of engineering that is generally concerned with understanding forces and motion, and their application  to solving problems of interest to society. The field includes aspects of  thermodynamics, fluid and solid mechanics, mechanisms, materials, and energy conversion and transfer, and involves the application of  physics, mathematics, chemistry, and increasingly, biology and com -puter science. Importantly, the field also emphasizes the process of  formulation, design, optimization, manufacture, and control of new sys -tems and devices.Technical developments in the last decade have established the  importance of interdisciplinary engineering and science, and as a result,  new technical disciplines within mechanical engineering have emerged.  These new areas build on an understanding of the fundamental behav -ior of physical systems; however, the focus of this work is at the inter -faces between traditional disciplines. Examples of the new disciplines include micro- and nano-mechanical systems, simulation and synthe -sis, integrated complex distributed systems, and biological engineering.Mechanical engineers can be found in many fields, including auto-motive, aerospace, materials processing and development, power pro -duction, consumer products, robotics and automation, semiconductor  processing, and instrumentation. Mechanical engineering can also be  the starting point for careers in bioengineering, environmental and aero -nautical engineering, finance, and business management.The Mechanical Engineering Option is accredited by the Engineering  Accreditation Commission of ABET, 111 Market Place, Suite 1050,  Baltimore, MD 21202-4012, (410) 347-7700. At the end of the first year, students who elect the Mechanical  Engineering Option are assigned advisers as close to their expressed  field of interest as possible, and together they develop programs of  study for the next three years. A student whose interests relate to mechanical engineering, but who  wishes to pursue a broader course of study than that allowed by the  requirements below, may elect the Engineering and Applied Science  Option.Attention is called to the fact that any student whose grade-point average is less than 1.9 at the end of the academic year in the required  courses listed below may be refused permission to continue work in  this option.Graduation Requirements 318ME Option Requirements 1. Technical communication: SEC 10 and one of SEC 11, SEC 12,  or SEC 13.2.  Mathematics: Ma 2, ACM 95 ab, and 9 units selected from Ma  3, Ma 6 a, ACM 104, or other ACM courses numbered 100 and  above. 3. Physics: 18 units selected from Ph 2 abc. 4. Computing: 9 units selected from ACM 11, CS 1, CS 2, CS 11. 5.  ME Core: ME 10, ME 11 abc, ME 12 abc, ME 13, ME 14, ME 40,  and ME 50 ab.6.  Capstone design: ME 72 ab or ME 90 abc or CS/EE/ME 75 abc.*7.  45 units of advanced engineering electives selected from a  list of approved courses or from courses pre-approved by the  Option Representative. 27 units must be from one track (depth  requirement) and at least 9 units from two other tracks (breadth  requirement).** 8. Courses satisfying requirements 1 through 7 must be taken for  grades, unless they are only offered pass/fail. * Students electing CS/EE/ME 75abc must complete at least 18 units distributed amongst all three quarters ** These courses are selected in consultation with the student™s adviser and typically taken in  the third and fourth years. Please consult the Mechanical and Civil Engineering website and / or  the adviser for further information.ME Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 2 9--Computing Elective9--ME 10Thinking Like an Engineer1--ME 11 abcThermal Science999ME 12 abc Mechanics 999ME 13Mechanical Prototyping  -4-ME 14Design and Fabrication--9ACM 95 abIntro. Meth. Applied Math. -1212HSS electives99-Total 464339Third Year Physics Electives9-9ME 50 abExp. and Modeling in ME-99319ME 40Dimensional and data analyses in engineering9--   Capstone Design99-SEC 10Technical Seminar Presentation --3SEC 11, SEC 12, or SEC 13Written Communication 3--HSS Electives9189Total 393630Fourth Year Math Electives9--Advanced ME electives18189HSS electives999Total 362718NEUROBIOLOGY MINOR (NB)The Neurobiology minor is intended for those who wish to supple -ment their Caltech undergraduate degree with knowledge of  neu -robiology.  The student™s transcript will include the phrase ﬁminor in  Neurobiologyﬂ. A Neurobiology minor is not available to majors in the  CNS or Biology options.NB Minor Requirements 1. Biology fundamentals. Bi 8 and Bi 92. Intermediate biology: Genetics: Bi 122; Development: Bi 117;  plus nine units of other 100-level Bi, NB, or Ch courses3. Introduction to neuroscience: NB/Bi/CNS 150 4. Advanced neurobiology: 18 additional units of 100- or 200-  level NB electives, that are not applied to the above require -ments and are not simultaneously used for fulfilling a require -ment of the student™s major option, approved by their assigned  biology advisor or the option representative.   PHILOSOPHY OPTION AND MINOR (PI)The philosophy option provides students with a broad education in  philosophy that is designed to complement the scientific curriculum at Caltech. Philosophy majors will be expected to learn about some of the  major figures and movements in the history of philosophy, and to learn  about contemporary philosophical debates. The philosophy option also aims to provide students with new perspectives on the material they  learn in their science courses, and to enable them to bring their techni -cal skills and scientific learning to traditional problems in philosophy.  Graduation Requirements 320The philosophy curriculum will help students to acquire the basic tools  of philosophical analysis: the ability to read and interpret philosophical  texts; the ability to identify strengths and weaknesses of philosophical  arguments; the ability to develop well-reasoned defenses of philosophi -cal positions; and the ability to anticipate objections to one™s own views.  In addition, the philosophy option will train students to express them -selves clearly and concisely in both writing and speaking. These critical  thinking and communication skills provide an excellent foundation for  any intellectual endeavor, and are critical to those pursuing careers in  fields such as law, business, medicine, and scientific research. The courses in the philosophy option concentrate in four major areas: philosophy of science; philosophy of mind, brain, and behavior;  history of philosophy; and ethics. In their coursework, students will  have the opportunity to discuss and debate philosophical issues in  small groups, and will learn how to offer and receive constructive  criticism. They will also receive detailed feedback on their persua -sive writing from several different members of the philosophy faculty.  In their senior thesis, philosophy majors will have the opportunity to pursue more intensive research in one particular area of philosophy,  and to sustain an argument on a larger scale, while working one-on- one with a member of the philosophy faculty. This will provide inter -ested students with a solid foundation for graduate work in philosophy and related fields.  Philosophy majors must take at least 99 units of philosophy courses during their four years as undergraduates. These must include 18 units  of Pl 90 ab, to be taken in any two consecutive terms in the senior year.  The 99 units may include nine units of freshman humanities in philoso -phy (courses cross-listed Hum/Pl numbered 60 or below), nine units of  Pl 98, and up to 18 units of study in related disciplines. Depending on their interests, philosophy majors may be required by the  option representative or their advisers to take up to 18 units in one or more  related areas. For example, students writing on political philosophy or phi -losophy of neuroscience will be expected to have the appropriate political  science or neuroscience background. Students whose primary interest  lies in the philosophy of scienceŠparticularly in the philosophy of specific  sciences such as physics or biologyŠwill have their intellectual interests  best served by taking classes in both the history and philosophy of sci-ence. Such students are encouraged to pursue the HPS option; or, if they  choose the philosophy option, they may be required to take some history  of science courses as part of their 99-unit requirement. Students considering the philosophy option will be well advised to take  a freshman humanities course in philosophy. From the sophomore year  onward, they should plan on taking one philosophy course per term, cul -minating in two terms of Pl 90 ab in the senior year. Students in Pl 90 ab  work with a faculty adviser to write a 10,000- to 12,000-word paper on a  topic of mutual interest. Senior theses are expected to be of a high stan -dard and to form the basis of students™ applications to graduate study in  philosophy, should they so desire. With the exception of Pl 98 and courses  taken during the first two quarters of the freshman year, all courses to be  counted toward the philosophy option must be taken for grades unless  special permission is granted by the option representative. 321PI Option Requirements 1. Pl 90 ab.2. 63 units of advanced philosophy courses, numbered 99 or  above. Up to nine units of freshman humanities in philosophy  (courses cross-listed Hum/Pl numbered 60 or below) and/or up  to nine units of Pl 98 may be substituted for up to 18 of these advanced units.    3. 18 units of advanced philosophy courses numbered 99 or above,  or advanced non-philosophy courses that are closely related to  the student™s area(s) of philosophical interest. (Students wishing  to count non-philosophy courses toward their option require -ments must obtain prior approval from the philosophy option  representative or their adviser. Students will normally not be per -mitted to satisfy this requirement with core courses.)  4. 54 units of science, mathematics, and engineering courses in addition to the core. This requirement cannot be satisfied by  core or menu courses, or by courses listed as satisfying the  introductory laboratory requirement. Students are strongly  encouraged to choose their additional courses in areas that  complement their philosophy studies.5. Three units of oral communication. En 84 satisfies this require -ment, as do oral communication courses offered by other  options. 6. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  the courses listed above. Courses used to complete the philosophy option under categories 1, 2, or 3 above may not be used to satisfy the requirements of another  option or minor. PI Minor Requirements The minor in philosophy is designed for students who want to pursue concentrated study in philosophy without the extensive course work and the senior thesis required by the philosophy option.  Philosophy minors must complete 72 units of philosophy courses.  Students wishing to do a minor in philosophy must declare a minor with  the philosophy option representative. Students completing the philos -ophy minor requirements will have the phrase ﬂminor in philosophyﬂ  added to their transcripts. With the exception of Pl 98 and courses  taken during the first two semesters of freshman year, all courses to be  counted toward the philosophy option or minor must be taken for grades  unless special permission is granted by the option representative. 1. 72 units of philosophy courses numbered 99 or above. 2. Nine units of Pl 98 may be substituted for any nine units of the 72 required for the minor. 3. Nine units of freshman humanities in philosophy (courses  cross-listed Hum/Pl numbered 60 or below) may be substituted  for any nine units of the 72 required for the minor. Courses used to complete the philosophy minor may not be used to satisfy the requirements of another option or minor. Graduation Requirements 322PHYSICS OPTION (Ph)The physics option offers instruction in the fundamentals of modern  physics and provides a foundation for graduate study, which is gener -ally necessary for a career in basic research. The physics program also  forms an excellent basis for future work in a variety of applied fields.  An intensive version of the sophomore physics course (waves, quan -tum mechanics, and statistical mechanics) is offered for those planning  further study in physics and the required junior-level courses give a  thorough treatment of fundamental principles. Elective courses taken  during the junior and senior years allow students to explore their par -ticular interest. Some electives offer broad surveys, while others con -centrate on particular fields of current research. A choice of laboratory  course is offered at several levels. Students interested in concentrating  their studies in one specific area of physics should refer to the under -graduate physics website for course schedule recommendations.  Students are encouraged to become active participants in research  on campus, both during the summer and during the school year.  Academic credit for physics work done outside of the classroom can  be awarded in a variety of ways.  Students must maintain a grade-point average of 1.9 or better each year in the subjects listed under this division to remain in the physics  option.Ph Option Requirements The first five requirements should be completed by the end of the  second year. In planning a program, note that Ph 6 and Ph 7 are each  offered only once per year, in the second and third terms, respectively.  The pass/fail option cannot be exercised for any courses used for these  requirements with the exception of courses that do not offer grades. 1.  Ph 3. 12.  Ma 2 and Ma 3.3.  Ph 12 abc.4.  Ph 6. 5.  Ph 7 or APh/EE 24.26. 18 units of Ph 77, or 27 units of Ph 78 (experimental thesis proj -ect), or 9 units of Ph 77 and 9 units from APh 77 or Ay 105, or 9  units of Ph 77 and 9 units of Ph 177.   7.  Ph 70. 38.  Ph 106 abc.9.  Ph 125 ab.10. Ph 21 or Ph 22 or one term of Ph 121 abc or Ay 190.  1 Other laboratory courses may be substituted for the Ph 3 requirement, including Ph 5, Ph 8  bc, or APh 9 a.2 APh 23 is a prerequisite for APh/EE 24 and can be used towards the advanced physics elec -tive requirement. 3 Other communication courses e.g., Ay 30 (or Ay 141) and 31 or Ma 10 and 11 may be substi -tuted for Ph 70.Ph Required Electives 1. 90 units of Advanced Physics Electives, in addition to the above, 323include any of the following: any Ph, APh, or Ay, course num -bered 100 or above, or any of Ph 5, Ph 22, Ph 78, Ph 79, ACM  95, ACM 101, APh/EE 23, Ma 5, Ma 108, or up to 10 units for Ay 20 Œ 21.  Nine units towards the 90 unit requirement will be  given for taking three terms of Ph 77.  Students are encouraged  to take ACM 95 or the quarter of Ph 129 that covers analysis as part of this requirement. The pass/fail option cannot be exer -cised for any courses used for this requirement with the excep -tion of ACM 95 and courses that do not offer grades. Not more  than 36 units of Ph courses numbered 200 or above taken on a  pass/fail basis may apply toward this requirement. No more than  18 units of Ph 171-172 may apply toward this requirement with -out permission from the Undergraduate Option Representative.  Additionally, Ph 171-172 may only apply toward this requirement  if taken in increments of six units or more and a written summa -ry (2-4 pages in length) of the work completed is submitted to the Undergraduate Option Representative within 2 weeks of the  beginning of the subsequent quarter. Students may also petition  the Undergraduate Option Representative to request that cours -es from other options with suitable physics content apply toward  this requirement.  2. Nine units of science and engineering electives outside of Ph, Ay, APh, Ma, and ACM. These units are in addition to the  required Core science electives.  Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including the  courses listed above.Ph Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ph 12 abc Waves, Quantum Physics, and  Statistical Mechanics999Ma 2, Ma 3Sophomore Mathematics 99-Ph 6, Ph 7Physics Laboratory -99ACM 95 abIntro. Methods of Applied  Math-1212Ph 21/22Computational Physics--6HSS and/or PE Electives1899Science/Engineering Electives9--Total 454845Graduation Requirements 324Third Year Ph 106 abTopics in Classical Physics  99-Ph 121 abcAdvanced Computational Physics666Ph 125 abQuantum Mechanics 99-Ph 70 Oral & Written Communication  6-[6]HSS and/or PE Electives999Advanced Physics Electives91233 [27]Total 484548Fourth Year Ph 77 abcAdvanced Physics Laboratory99-Ph 127 aStatistical Physics9--Advanced Physics Electives9918Electives91818HSS and/or PE Electives999Total 454545POLITICAL SCIENCE OPTION (PS)The political science option provides students with training in the sub -stance and methods of modern political science, including the analysis  of representative democracy, electoral institutions, the allocation of public  goods, and regulatory behavior. The option emphasizes formal tools like  game theory, social choice theory, and formal political theory along with  quantitative methodologies to test those theories. In addition, the option  encourages original research. The design of the political science option  ensures that students will be well suited to pursue careers in government  or the private sector, as well as to pursue graduate work in political sci -ence, law, or public policy. Students who complete the political science  option can expect the following learning outcomes:  an understanding of and ability to use the theoretical tools of social  choice and game theory as applied to politics;an understanding and knowledge of how to apply quantitative  methods to study politics;the ability to present complex theoretical and quantitative material  in research reports and presentations; and the skills necessary to  pursue graduate education and careers in law, government, politics,  or public policy. Note: The official source on requirements for graduation is the Caltech cat -alog from the year in which a student began studies at Caltech. Please see  325the catalog online, from this and previous years, for information regarding  the applicable option requirements.  PS Option Requirements 1. PS 12, PS 132, Ec 122.2. Four political science courses from the list: PS 120, 123, 135,  PS 139, PS 141ab, or PS/Ec 172.3. PS 99 ab.4. Ma 3.5. 36 additional units in advanced political science, economics, law, social science, psychology, or history. 6. 36 additional units in advanced social science, science, engi-neering, or mathematics.7. Passing grades must be earned in a total of 486 units, including  all courses used to satisfy the above requirements.  PS Typical Course Schedule Units per term1st2nd3rd Second Year Ma 3 Probability & Statistics -9-PS 12Introduction to Political Science 9--PS 132Formal Theories in Political Science 9--EC 122Econometrics9--Electives183645Total 454845Third Year Political Science Electives 1181818Electives272727Total 484545Fourth Year PS 99 abResearch in Political Science -99Political Science Electives 1181818Graduation Requirements 326Electives271818Total 454545 1 See option requirements 2, 5, and 6. STRUCTURAL MECHANICS MINOR (SM)This minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s undergrad-uate degrees and is designed for students who wish to broaden their knowledge beyond their normal major, especially for those who wish  to join the structural engineering profession after graduation or pur -sue a graduate degree in structural mechanics or structural engineering.  Students completing the structural mechanics minor requirements will  have the phrase ﬁminor in structural mechanicsﬂ added to their aca-demic transcripts.SM Minor Requirements The student must complete 54 units of classes selected from Ae/AM/ CE 102 abc, AM/CE 151, Ae/CE 221, Ae/CE 165ab and CE 160 ab, and obtain a grade of BŒ or higher. Courses taken as part of the struc -tural mechanics minor are counted toward the total 486-unit Institute  graduation requirement. VISUAL CULTURE MINOR (VC) The minor in Visual Culture provides students with an intensive educa -tion in visual histories and theories. Visual Culture minor students will  become familiar with a range of visual forms, from the traditional fine  arts to film and digital media, as well as with histories and theories of vision and visuality. Students will also learn essential skills of visual  and media literacy through both close formal analysis of objects and  contextualized readings that emphasize differences across history and  geography. Visual Culture courses emphasize writing and critical read -ing of both written texts and images, including through practice-based  courses taught by artists in residence, in order to help students to  develop communication skills that can enhance their careers as scien -tists, engineers, and medical professionals. The Visual Culture minor  also provides excellent preparation for those seeking careers in any  field that involves extensive written, oral, and/or visual communication.  Visual Culture Minor Requirements  Visual Culture minors must take 72 units of Visual Culture courses.  These units may include one freshman humanities course; they may  also include one directed reading course (VC 90). Students wishing  to do a minor in Visual Culture must declare a minor with the Visual  Culture option representative. All courses to be counted toward the  minor in Visual Culture must be taken for grades with the exception of:  a) one directed reading course, and b) a freshman humanities course in  327Visual Culture when taken in the first two quarters of the freshman year.  Students completing the Visual Culture minor requirements will have  the phrase ﬁminor in Visual Cultureﬂ added to their transcripts. 1. 72 units of Visual Culture courses numbered 99 or above. 2. Nine units of freshman humanities in Visual Culture (courses  cross-listed Hum/VC numbered 60 or below) may be substituted  for any nine of the 72 units required for the minor. 3. Nine units of VC 90 [directed reading] may be substituted for any  nine of the 72 units required for the minor. Courses used to complete the Visual Culture minor may not be  used to satisfy the requirements of another option or minor. However,  these courses may be used to satisfy core Institute requirements in the  humanities.Graduation Requirements 328Section FourInformation for  Graduate Students329Graduate Policies and Procedures The Institute offers graduate degrees of Master of Science and Doctor  of Philosophy, and in special cases the degree of Engineer. The Institute is organized into six academic divisions: Biology  and Biological Engineering; Chemistry and Chemical Engineering; Engineering and Applied Science; Geological and Planetary Sciences; the Humanities and Social Sciences; and Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy.  Graduate work at the Institute is further organized into graduate  options, which are supervised by those professors whose interests and  research are closely related to the area of the option, within the admin -istrative jurisdiction of one or more of the divisions. A faculty member serves as the representative for an option. The  option representative provides consultation on academic programs,  degree requirements, financial aid, etc., and provides general supervi -sion to graduate students in the option. The Committee on Graduate Studies, which includes the option representatives, elected members of  the faculty at large, and graduate students appointed by the Graduate  Student Council, exercises supervision over the scholastic require -ments established by the faculty for all advanced degrees, provides  policy guidance to the dean of graduate studies, and certifies all candi-dates for graduate degrees to the faculty for their approval. A list of the  option representatives for the current academic year can be found at  registrar.caltech.edu/current-students/option-reps.  GRADUATE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  ADMISSION TO GRADUATE STANDING  Application An application for admission should be completed online through the  Graduate Office at gradoffice.caltech.edu/admissions. Admission is  granted once a year to a limited number of students who show promise  for scholarship and research at the highest level. Completed applications  are due between December 1 and January 1, for enrollment at the begin -ning of the fall term of the following year. Applicants will automatically be  considered for financial aid; no additional application is required. To be admitted to graduate standing, an applicant must have received  a bachelor™s degree, or the equivalent, representing the completion of  an undergraduate course in science or engineering related to one of  the options offered by the Institute. Applicants must, moreover, have  attained a scholastic record and provide recommendations to indicate  the ability to pursue, with distinction, advanced study and research. The  graduate program thrives on exceptional individuals from a diverse range  of backgrounds and experiences, and we highly encourage applications  from members of groups underrepresented in science and engineering.  Graduate admission is covered by Caltech™s Nondiscrimination Policy.  For more information on this policy, please refer to page 63. Applicants should refer to the Graduate Office website for additional  requirements, a list of supporting documents, and option-specific appli -cation deadlines. 330International Students In order to be admitted for graduate study, students from non-En -glish-speaking countries are expected to read, write, and speak English  and comprehend the spoken language. Although not required for  admission, for applicants whose native language is not English or have not received a degree from a university or college where English is the  primary language of instruction, it is important to demonstrate a strong  capability in English prior to admission to Caltech. This can be done by self-reporting scores from the Educational Testing Service (TOEFL),  Pearson Test of English Academic (PTE Academic), the Cambridge  Examinations and the International English Language Testing System  (IELTS), or other services that provide a certified English-language pro -ficiency examination. All international students are evaluated upon arrival at Caltech and, if  it is determined that additional instruction in English is needed, they will be assigned to an English as a Second Language (ESL) course. To be a  candidate for an advanced degree, the student must have clear self-ex -pression in both oral and written English. VISITING STUDENT APPOINTMENTS A limited number of visiting student appointments are made each year.  Visiting student status is restricted to students who hold a bachelor™s  degree and are current graduate students at another institution. The  invitation process requires sponsorship by a Caltech faculty member,  and requests should be made directly to the Graduate Office, following  the visiting student instructions on the Graduate Office website. The  dean of graduate studies may limit the number of visiting students in any given year. Visiting students are subject to the Honor System (see  page 20) and other Institute policies and are under the purview of the  dean of graduate studies. Visiting students are categorized into two  main classifications.Special StudentsSpecial Students enroll as full-time students (36 units), in a research  course and/or coursework numbered 100 or higher, which may be  transferred to their home institution. Special Student appointments are  allowed for one year, renewable each year up to a maximum of three  years. Special Students will not be considered to be working toward a  Caltech degree, and courses taken under this program cannot be used  to fulfill the requirements for a Caltech degree, nor does registration  count toward the minimum residency requirement for an advanced  degree.  Special Students are eligible for the same privileges as regular -ly enrolled graduate students, and will be billed for tuition and fees.  Short-term Special Students that do not need academic credit must  still enroll in a research class for a minimum number of units and will  be billed tuition and fees based on the level of enrollment and the  length of stay. For those students who receive a Caltech stipend, tui -tion remission will be charged to the faculty hosts™ supporting grant to  cover the tuition and fees assessment. Special Students who do not 331receive a Caltech stipend will be billed a reduced tuition and fees rate.  (For current rates, see the expense summary on page 342.) Visiting Student Researchers The Visiting Student Researcher status is limited to short-term vis -its of one month to one year and is not renewable. Visiting Student  Researchers are not eligible to enroll in a research course and/or  coursework, and will not receive academic credit from Caltech, but  will receive a Caltech identification card. Visiting Student Researchers  are also required to provide proof of health insurance and any required  medical and immunization records for the duration of the visit.  Students in this status are not eligible to receive a salary through  the Institute payroll, and are not eligible for Caltech privileges that  are extended to enrolled students. They may be reimbursed for  research-related expenses only, but it is the Caltech faculty host™s  responsibility to ensure that the supporting grant can be used for such  purposes and that there are no restrictions on spending. Students  receiving a salary through the Institute payroll and/or requiring a  transcript to transfer academic credit must be appointed as Special  Students. Exchange Programs Some academic options have formal exchange programs that they  have arranged with other institutions. Exchange students must have a visiting student appointment, and the type of appointment will depend upon the terms of the agreement for the particular exchange program.  These programs are administered by the option, and requests should  be made directly to the Graduate Office following the same procedure  for visiting students.GRADUATE RESIDENCE  One term of residence shall consist of one term™s work of not fewer  than 36 units of advanced work in which a passing grade is recorded.  Advanced work is defined as study or research in courses whose des -ignated course number is 100 or above. If fewer than 36 units are suc -cessfully carried, the residence will be regarded as short by the same  ratio, but the completion of a greater number of units in any one term  will not be regarded as increasing the residence. In general, the resi -dency requirements are as follows: for Master of Science, a minimum  of three terms of enrollment; for the degree of Engineer, a minimum of  eight terms of enrollment; and for Doctor of Philosophy, a minimum of  12 terms of enrollment. REGISTRATION  Graduate students are required to register for each term, including  summer, whether they are taking classes, conducting research, doing  independent reading, writing a thesis, or utilizing any other academic  service or campus facility. A graduate student must be registered for a minimum of 36 research  and/or course units to be classified as a full-time student, and may not enroll in excess of 36 research units. A graduate student who registers  Graduate Policies and Procedures 332for less than 36 total units, or who undertakes activities related to the  Institute aggregating more than 62 hours per week (in class, research,  and teaching assistantship units), must receive approval in advance  from the dean of graduate studies. A petition for this purpose may be  obtained from the Graduate Office website and must carry the recom -mendation of the option representative of the student™s major option  before submission. Graduate students register during a two-week period each quarter.  A late registration fee of $50 is assessed for failure to register on time.  Graduate students with a Bursar™s bill balance of $1,500 or more may  have a hold placed on their registration for the subsequent term the  day before online registration opens. The hold will be released once  students have paid their bill or worked out a satisfactory payment plan with the Bursar™s Office. Before registering, students should consult with their adviser. An  adviser is assigned to each entering graduate student by the option representative. In most options, a new adviser is assigned when the  student begins research. Only members of the professorial faculty may  serve as advisers. With the approval of the dean of graduate studies,  any graduate student whose work is not satisfactory may be refused  registration at the beginning of any term by the division in which the  student is doing their major work. See the section on Satisfactory Academic Progress for more information. In registering for research, students should indicate the name of the  instructor in charge, and should consult with the instructor to determine  the number of units to which the proposed work corresponds. At the end  of the term, the instructor in charge may decrease the number of units for  which credit is given if the instructor feels that the progress of the research  does not justify the original amount.Students will not receive credit for courses unless they are properly  registered. Students themselves are responsible for making certain that  all grades to which they are entitled have been properly recorded. Please  note that graduate students who enroll in courses numbered below 100  will not receive credit for those courses unless the course(s) is specified  in the requirements for a graduate degree as stipulated in the  Caltech  Catalog.All changes in registration must be reported to the Registrar™s Office  by the student. Such changes are governed by the last dates for add -ing or dropping courses as shown on the Academic Calendar on pages  4 and 5. A student may not withdraw from or add a course after the  last date for dropping or adding courses without the option™s consent,  written approval from the instructor of the relevant course, and the  approval of the dean of graduate studies. If the withdrawal occurs after Add Day of any term, a W (standing for ﬁwithdrawnﬂ) will be recorded on the student™s transcript for all courses  in which the student is enrolled. A grade of W is not included in the  computation of the student™s grade-point average. General Administrative Requirements Graduate students are required to have continuity in registration, main-tain full-time status, make satisfactory progress, and be in residence  333until all requirements for a degree are fulfilled. This means that students  must either be registered, enrolled or on an approved leave from the  Institute. Reduced duty status maintains registration for a student who  cannot carry a full load due to a medical condition, disability or pregnan -cy. Registration is required for the term in which the thesis defense is  undertaken, with the exception of the first week of each term. Approval  of the dean is required for any student seeking to enroll for a subse -quent term beyond the defense during the academic year. Once the  degree is conferred, further enrollment as a graduate student is not  permitted. Detached duty status maintains registration for a student doing  research at an external location, such as a national laboratory or anoth -er academic institution, for an extended period.   Students are entitled to at least two weeks™ annual vacation (in  addition to Institute holidays), and they should arrange their vacation schedules with their research advisers early in each academic year. Any  questions should be referred to the graduate studies Office. GRADUATE STUDENT LEAVES OF ABSENCE  Petitions for LeavePetition forms for leaves may be obtained from the Graduate Office  website and must, before submission to the dean, carry the acknowl -edgment of the student™s option representative and, where appro -priate, the thesis adviser. Petitions for medical leave must carry the  recommendation of the executive director of student wellness services  or their designee. In case of a lapse in status, readmission must be  sought before academic work may be resumed or requirements for the  degree completed. While on LeaveA student on a personal, medical or involuntary leave may not attend classes, live in Institute housing, participate in Institute programs, use  Institute facilities, work on campus, or use student resources such as  Student Wellness Services and Center for Diversity. Career Advising  and Experiential Learning (CAEL) is, by default, open to all students  who have not been permanently separated from the Institute, regard -less of leave or registration status, unless otherwise revoked by the  director of CAEL.  Voluntary Leave Personal LeaveA student may request a voluntary leave of absence for personal  reasons by submitting a personal (non-medical) leave petition to the  Graduate Office for approval. International students should consult with  the International Student Programs (ISP) office regarding visa impli -cations prior to submitting the leave petition. The dean may grant a personal leave provided (a) the student is making satisfactory academic  Graduate Policies and Procedures 334progress as determined by the student™s adviser, (b) the leave is for one  year or less, although special circumstances can be considered for a  longer leave, and (c) the leave extends over a period that includes at least one full term. A petition to return from a personal leave should be submitted six  (6) weeks before the first day of the term for which the student intends  to return. Return from a personal leave is subject to the approval of the  dean and the student having an approved adviser and ongoing fund -ing to support the student™s research. If a student does not anticipate  having an adviser upon return, they will need to work with the option  representative to arrange for funding and a new adviser in advance of  the return. Return will only be granted once an adviser and funding are  in place.Medical Leave If a student is unable to complete their coursework or other course of study due to medical reasons, the student may petition for a med -ical leave of absence by submitting a medical leave petition to the Graduate Office for approval. The petition for medical leave must be  recommended by the executive director of Student Wellness Services  or their designee. International students should consult with the  International Student Programs office regarding visa implications prior  to submitting the medical leave petition. Medical leaves are expected to extend over a period that includes at  least one full term, although special circumstances may be considered  for approval of a shorter leave upon the recommendation of a student™s  treatment team.  Students must provide documentation of the need for the leave by a  licensed treatment provider. Students may be required to sign a release  of information form authorizing their treatment provider to communicate  relevant medical information to representatives within Student Wellness  Services and the Graduate Office to facilitate evaluation of the need for  the leave and to determine appropriate conditions associated with the  leave and establishing expectations for return from the leave.  The Institute may impose conditions on return from a medical leave,  which may include confirmation from the student™s health care provider  that the student is following the recommended course of treatment, the  student™s consent for the provider to discuss the student™s condition  or progress during the leave with Caltech officials, including represen -tatives of Student Wellness Services and the Graduate Office, and an  independent evaluation of the student™s readiness to return by a qual -ified medical professional. Any conditions of return will be specified at  the time of the leave approval.  A petition to return from medical leave must be submitted six (6)  weeks before the anticipated term for which the student intends to  return. The return process includes an interview with the director of  Student Wellness Services or their designee and the submission of a  completed return from medical leave petition and provider recommen -dation. Students are expected to sign a release of information form  authorizing their treatment providers to communicate with Caltech,  including representatives of Student Wellness Services and the  335Graduate Office to determine readiness to return and any recommen -dations for reasonable accommodations. Return from a medical leave  of absence is subject to the final approval of the dean. If the student is  permitted to return from the leave, any conditions of return will be com -municated to the student in writing.A student returning from a leave for medical reasons will maintain  the same academic standing that they had prior to the leave and will be subject to the same academic requirements for maintaining academic  progress. Additional information and resources regarding medical leave,  including financial and transcript implications, can be found at www. gradoffice.caltech.edu/current/LeavePolicy. Pregnancy Consistent with Caltech policy, the requirements of Title IX, and Section  66281.7 of the California Education Code, students who are unable  to complete their coursework or other course of study for a period of time due to a pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions are  eligible for a pregnancy leave of absence. Students who are pregnant  or who have recently given birth are also eligible for reasonable accom -modations.  Students are not required to take a leave of absence, withdraw, or limit  their graduate studies because of pregnancy, childbirth or related medical  conditions. However, students who are disabled due to pregnancy, child -birth and related medical conditions are eligible to take a pregnancy leave  of absence. The Institute provides up to six (6) weeks of pay to students  during a pregnancy leave of absence; an additional 6 weeks of pay is  available through family bonding leave (see following section).  A pregnant student who wishes to take a pregnancy leave should  submit a pregnancy leave petition to the Graduate Office. Medical  documentation from the student™s treating health care provider may be  required.  A student who chooses to take a leave of absence because they are pregnant or have recently given birth shall be allowed an additional  period commensurate with the length of the leave, but not to exceed 12 additional months, to prepare for and take preliminary and qualifying  examinations and an equal extension of time toward the normative time  to degree while in candidacy for a graduate degree, unless a longer  extension is medically necessary.  An enrolled student in good academic standing who chooses to take  a leave of absence because they are pregnant or have recently given  birth shall return to their program in good academic standing following  an approved leave period of up to one academic year, subject to the  administrative requirements described above, unless there is a medical  reason for a longer leave, in which case standing in the graduate pro -gram shall be maintained during that period of the leave. The Institute also provides reasonable accommodations to pregnant  students consistent with federal and state law. Reasonable accommo -dations may include allowing pregnant students to maintain a safe dis -tance from hazardous substances, allowing them to make up tests and  assignments that are missed for pregnancy-related reasons or excusing  of absences that are medically necessary. Graduate Policies and Procedures 336Bonding Students may take six (6) weeks of family bonding leave with pay. An  enrolled student in good academic standing who chooses to take a  leave of absence because of the recent birth or adoption of his or her  child may request a bonding leave by submitting a bonding leave peti -tion to the Graduate Office for approval. Bonding leave is in addition  to pregnancy leave, providing eligible students with a combined total  of up to 12 weeks of paid leave. Students returning from an approved  bonding leave shall return to his or her program in good academic  standing following the leave, subject to the administrative requirements  described above.Dependent Care LeaveGraduate students may take an unpaid leave for the purpose of full-time dependent care due to child care, school closings, and other  dependent needs that require students to take a break from their  studies. Students planning on taking this leave should first schedule a meeting with one of the graduate deans. Under this leave, students are eligible to retain existing benefits, including health and dental. If  in Caltech housing, students may remain for up to one term while on  dependent care leave. Please note that students with dependent care  needs may instead request a reduced course load by submitting an  underload petition.Involuntary LeaveThe dean or designee may determine that it is necessary to place a student on an involuntary leave in a variety of circumstances, including  when a student demonstrates behavior that poses a threat to health  or safety, causes significant disruption to the Caltech community, for  the personal safety or welfare of the student involved, as an interim  measure, or as a result of a disciplinary action. The dean may impose  an involuntary leave in appropriate circumstances, such as where a  student™s behavior: (1) has, or threatens to, cause significant property  damage; (2) significantly disrupts the Caltech community; (3) presents  a substantial risk of harm to self or others; (4) indicates the student is unable or unwilling to carry out self-care obligations; or (5) violates a  Caltech policy or the honor system. An involuntary leave also may be imposed when the student requires a level of care from the Institute  community that exceeds the reasonable accommodations, resources  and staffing that the Institute can reasonably be expected to provide for  the student™s well-being. Review and Decision ProcessIf the conduct has been the subject of an investigation or review under  an Institute process or procedure, the dean will consider the findings  and conclusions reached in that process. In other circumstances  described above, in making an informed decision to place a student on involuntary leave, the dean will conduct an individualized assessment and consider relevant information including information provided in a  timely manner by the student. 337The dean may consult with other Institute personnel, including but not limited to Security and Residential Life personnel, faculty, staff and  other individuals or departments. If appropriate and feasible, the dean  may seek cooperation and involvement of parents or guardians of the  student. Medical information, including medical information provided in a  timely manner by the student, may be considered if the behavior is  associated with a physical or mental condition. In appropriate cases,  the dean may consult with the executive director of Student Wellness  Services or their designee and/or require a physical or mental evalua -tion from a health professional if the dean believes such an evaluation  is necessary in order to make an informed decision. Students are  expected, if necessary, to sign a release of information to facilitate  discussions between Caltech and the health professional conducting  the evaluation. The dean will also consider whether relevant risk factors  can be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level through reason -able accommodation.Written Decision The student will be advised in writing of the decision to impose an involuntary leave. The dean may stipulate conditions that must be met before the student may return. An involuntary leave may be a perma -nent separation from the Institute (i.e. expulsion); for a specific dura -tion; or until certain conditions have been met. If the involuntary leave is not a permanent separation, the student will be advised of the length of the leave and/or any conditions for return. Emergency LeaveIf the dean determines that a student™s continued presence is likely to  pose a substantial risk to the safety and well-being of the student or others, the dean may place the student on an emergency interim leave  before a final determination is made. The dean will make reasonable  attempts to meet with the student and consider relevant information  provided by the student, if available within the timeframe needed to  make a decision, before deciding on an emergency interim leave. An  emergency interim leave will remain in effect until a final decision has  been made.Return from LeaveA student on involuntary leave will not be allowed to return until the  dean makes a fact-specific assessment of the circumstances, consid -ers relevant risk factors, and concludes that the student does not pose  a significant disruption to the functioning of the Institute community and/or does not pose a substantial risk to the health and safety of the student or others. The dean will consider relevant information, including  information provided by the student. In cases where a student has a  physical or mental condition associated with the behavior triggering the leave, the dean will also consider whether the relevant risks can  be eliminated by a reasonable accommodation. The dean may consult  with other Institute administrators, as appropriate, in making their deci -Graduate Policies and Procedures 338sion. The student will be notified in writing of the dean™s determination  of whether the student will be permitted to return from a leave, will not  be permitted to return from the leave, or will be permanently separated  from the Institute. If the student is permitted to return from the leave,  any conditions of return will be communicated to the student in writing. AppealIf a decision by the dean to place a student on involuntary leave is imposed as a sanction resulting from a finding of responsibility under  an Institute process or procedure, appeal rights and limitations, such  as limitations on grounds for appeal, are governed by the applicable  Institute process or procedure. In all other cases, a decision by the  dean to place a student on involuntary leave may be appealed in writ-ing within 10 days to the vice president for student affairs (or designee).  GUIDELINES FOR GRADUATE STUDENT ADVISING  The relationship between a faculty adviser and graduate student should  be founded on mutual respect and open communication. Advisers and  students should discuss the nature of their working relationship early  and continue this discussion throughout their period of collaboration  to ensure mutually understood and compatible expectations. These  discussions should be frequent and open, and should include not only  work, research goals, and performance reviews, but also change of sta -tus, time for personal and family responsibilities, time off, and concerns  about academic or work situations. Both the student and adviser have the obligation to initiate meetings as necessary to ensure the success  of the relationship. After achieving candidacy, each Ph.D. student should be assigned a  thesis advising committee consisting of a minimum of three professorial  faculty members. This committee typically meets at least once a year beginning after candidacy or the fourth year of graduate study. The graduate student-faculty adviser relationship should be guided by  norms of fairness and professionalism. Both faculty and graduate students  should avoid relationships that conflict with their respective roles and  duties at Caltech. Both are bound by the prevailing policies prohibiting  discrimination and harassment (Nondiscrimination Policy, page 63; Sex-  and Gender-Based Misconduct, page 67, and Unlawful Harassment, page  118). Concerns relating to academic or work situations should be raised  promptly between the persons directly involved, and handled informally if  possible. Both students and advisers have the responsibility to raise and  address concerns and conflicts promptly, honestly, and in a manner that  conforms with academic integrity and professionalism. Caltech policy  requires that students™ concerns be addressed fairly and promptly, and  prohibits retaliation or discrimination against students for appropriately  voicing or raising a concern. If a problem remains unresolved or if direct discussion is not  possible, a student can seek assistance from division officers (e.g.,  option representatives) or the graduate deans. At any time, a student  may request that discussions remain confidential. For more details  about sources of assistance, consult the graduate option regulations  339(starting on page 344) and the Student Problem Resolution Process  (page 42).PART-TIME PROGRAMS  Part-time graduate study programs at the Institute are for master™s  seeking graduate students who cannot devote full time to their studies and such students are subject to the following rules:  Degree Programs   regular application form accmpanied by a detailed plan for meet -ing the course requirements for the degree.      by a Caltech faculty member.   required to take at least 27 units of graduate course work and/or  research each term.   -dence.  program or to accept it under more stringent conditions.   Non-degree Programs Caltech employees, both campus and JPL, are eligible to apply to take  one or more graduate courses for credit. Participants in this program  will not be considered to be working toward a Caltech degree, in con -trast to the part-time program for graduate degrees described above,  and courses taken under this program cannot be used to fulfill the  requirements for a Caltech degree. At least one month prior to the start of the term, the employee should have an initial discussion with the option representative of the  option in which the course is to be taken. Application should be made to the Graduate Office by completing the special form provided for this  purpose, and providing a transcript of academic work and a letter of  recommendation. The employee must meet the prerequisites for the  course, and must obtain the written permission of the instructor. The  decision on admission to take each course will be made by the course instructor and the option representative, with final approval by the dean  of graduate studies. Taking an additional course at a later time will  require full reapplication. It is the employee™s responsibility to arrange a  revised work schedule with the appropriate supervisor and approval of  the employee™s supervisor is required. Part-time non-degree students are subject to the Honor System (see  page 20) and are under the purview of the dean of graduate studies.  They may take only courses numbered 100 or higher and research  courses are excluded from the program. For courses in which a letter  grade is offered, these students may not register to receive a pass/ fail grade in the course, nor can credit for the course be obtained by  examination. The option may limit the number of non-degree students  admitted to any one course.Graduate Policies and Procedures 340RESPONSIBLE CONDUCT OF RESEARCHCaltech researchers are expected to adhere to the highest professional  standards in the conduct of research. Faculty members are charged by  the Institute with the responsibility to safeguard the basic principles of  research integrity, academic freedom, and public interest. Students are  expected to also follow these same principles. When government funds  are involved in the support of research, investigators are required to  take specific steps to adhere to all rules and regulations of the govern -ment and sponsoring agencies. Students are required to have specific  training in research ethics and integrity as well as conform to standards  established by research supervisors or their laboratories. There are two  situations in which this is mandated by federal law.  National Institutes of HealthStudents that are funded through NIH grants, work with human or  vertebrate animal subjects, or are required as part of their academ -ic option™s curriculum, have to meet a NIH requirement for training  in specified areas as described in the Caltech Guide to Sponsored  Research. In order to meet the NIH requirement, Caltech requires  that all trainees supported by NIH funds take Biology course 252 ﬁResponsible Conduct of Research.ﬂ National Science FoundationTraining in Responsible Conduct of Research is also required of stu -dents funded on NSF awards, including the GRFP program. In order  to satisfy the NSF mandate, Caltech requires that students supported  from NSF funds as described above shall take the online course on  Research Ethics Education (CITI). If a student can document having passed a similar, qualifying pro -gram at another institution, Caltech may accept that in lieu of complet-ing Caltech™s program. You must submit documentation in the form of  a transcript or certificate to the Graduate Office to receive credit for  previous work. A passing grade in Bi 252 is an acceptable alternative to  passing the CITI online Responsible Conduct of Research course. CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND COMMITMENT OF GRADUATE STUDENTS The Institute has a long-standing philosophy that all graduate students should be given the opportunity to be completely focused on graduate studies and research. This is one of the unique aspects of Caltech™s  graduate school and a key factor in the high level of productivity and  accomplishment by our graduate students. To enable this, the faculty  and Institute provide financial aid in the form of fellowships, tuition  scholarships, graduate teaching, and research assistantships. The  stipend and salary levels for students are modest but sufficient for  economical students to live debt-free during their graduate studies.  The financial support provided by the Institute and the requirements for  continuous enrollment also enable almost all students to complete the  degree programs in a timely manner. 341In turn, the Institute expects that graduate students should be 100  percent committed to graduate studies while enrolled in a graduate  program. Graduate students are expected to be continuously enrolled  full-time, year-round, until they complete their degree program. In addi -tion, graduate students should not accept employment, start or run a business, or engage in any activity inside or outside of the Institute that creates a conflict of commitment with their full-time, degree-seeking  status.ExceptionsThere are some very limited exceptions to this policy. The Institute  encourages extracurricular activities that provide service to the com -munity and do not impact the student™s academic progress or full-time  status. The Institute also recognizes that some students desire to gain  experience as instructors or work in an educational or research setting  outside of Caltech. Outside EmploymentStudents must have the approval of their adviser, the option represen -tative, and the dean of graduate studies in order to engage in any out-side employment activities. Once permission is granted, students may engage in employment of up to one day per week (8 hours) for a limit -ed-duration for these purposes (see Financial Assistance, page 354).  Students must declare to the dean of graduate studies all external  funding, including fellowships, awards, or employment, part- or full-time,  which supports their academic activities/research. The Institute may  adjust Institute financial aid allocated accordingly to maintain the stipend  within the Institute guidelines and to recover tuition from outside sources   be reduced if the income is significant, and in the case of long-term,  unreported employment activities, the student may be asked to repay financial aid. Students may not hold a position of line responsibility in an  outside enterprise for pay or profit. International students on a visa are further required to consult with  the office of International Student Programs to determine eligibility.  Students must provide official documentation of the financial award  or salary, as well as submit a request to the Graduate Office before  accepting any employment. Permission to engage in outside employ -ment is contingent on the student maintaining satisfactory academic  progress as determined by the dean of graduate studies in consultation with the adviser and option representative.Non-Paid ActivitiesStudents must have the approval of their adviser, the option repre -sentative, and the dean of graduate studies in order to engage in or  continue in any outside activities wherein the time committed to those  activities may impact the student™s progress toward completion of  degree requirements.  Graduate Policies and Procedures 342Leave of AbsenceStudents who work full-time off campus in a commercial organization  are expected to take a personal leave of absence. They will not be  enrolled during this time, and the ﬁclockﬂ will stop on their graduate  career. Taking a leave of absence in order to work requires the endorse -ment of the adviser and permission of the dean of graduate studies. A leave of absence is always required when the job is not directly related  to thesis research. Students who need to stop their studies to address  health issues should take a medical leave of absence, which requires  the endorsement of Student Wellness Services as well as the permis -sion of the dean of graduate studies.Detached DutyIn some cases, a student may be engaged in research at an external  laboratory or research institute under the supervision of a Caltech faculty  adviser, and conducting research that is directly related to their degree  program. Another situation is that a student may be invited to be a visiting  researcher at another university, or the student may need to be working  with a faculty member who has left Caltech and is working at another  institution.Students may go on detached duty rather than on leave of absence if  the adviser and dean of graduate studies approve and there is documen -tation of a research program integral to their thesis project and appropriate  mentoring. Students on detached duty should have completed their res -idency requirements and advanced to candidacy prior to moving to the  host institution.The student should submit the documentation and a petition form to  the Graduate Office. Students on detached duty are still enrolled as full- time students but are in residence at another location. They may be paid  by Caltech or through another organization. It is the student™s responsibility  to continue to be in good standing, and registered and in full-time status  while on detached duty. Detached duty petitions are usually valid for a lim -ited time, less than one year, and may be renewed upon request. Consulting and Other Entrepreneurial Activities Graduate students are sometimes approached to perform paid consulting  or are inspired to be entrepreneurs. In these cases, students have to be  exceptionally careful not to create conflicts of commitment or conflicts  of interest through these activities. Students considering these activities  should familiarize themselves with the Caltech policies on conflict of  interest, outside employment or business activity, and the Caltech ethics  handbook. Students may not engage in any consulting activities that inter-fere with their primary graduate student activities of learning and research.  Scrupulous care must be taken to ensure that Caltech™s name and its let -terhead are used neither directly in any correspondence between the stu -dent and the company the student wishes to consult for, nor in any reports  that student may submit to the company. Of particular concern are students consulting or accepting employ -ment from a company in which their adviser or other Caltech faculty  member is directing a student™s research and has a significant interest  343or is a paid consultant. In such cases, the division chair must approve  any student involvement in the activities performed for the company.  The student must submit a written disclosure, and a conflict manage -ment plan will be put in place.Graduate students should not enter into any consulting or employment  agreement with intellectual property encumbrances or confidentiality provi -sions that are in conflict with the student™s commitments to Caltech or that  may compromise academic progress. Please refer to the Graduate Office website for the complete policy and  regulations regarding conflicts of commitment and interest. If there are any  questions about the propriety of any outside activity or agreements, this  should be discussed with the Graduate Office and, if necessary, the Office  of Research Compliance and the Office of the General Counsel. WORKING AT SPECIAL LABORATORIES Students who desire to take advantage of the unique opportunities  available at one of the special laboratories (e.g., JPL) for Ph.D. thesis work may be allowed to do so provided that they maintain good con -tact with academic life on campus, the laboratory involved commits financial support for the duration of the thesis research, and all Caltech  graduate thesis research carried out at a special laboratory is under the  supervision of Caltech faculty members.A student™s request to carry out thesis work at a special laboratory  should be formally endorsed by the appropriate committee of his or her  option and by the special laboratory, on a petition submitted through  the option representative to the dean of graduate studies. The special  laboratory should recognize its commitment of special equipment or  any other resources required for the thesis work. Approval by the spe -cial laboratory should also indicate that the thesis topic is a sensible one, and that it is not likely to be preempted by the laboratory. A student may take similar advantage of unique opportunities at a corporate or governmental research and development facility under the  same conditions, providing that there exists a formal written agreement  between the R&D facility and the student™s thesis adviser, and that  advance written approval is obtained from the dean of graduate stud -ies. Such training may in some cases involve full-time employment at the laboratory for a limited period of time for the purpose of engaging in the essential data collection that is integral to a student™s thesis.  Typically, such students who are not in a local laboratory are placed on  detached duty status.Employment by a special laboratory of a graduate student for  work not connected with the thesis should be regarded as equivalent to  other outside employment.EXCHANGE PROGRAM WITH SCRIPPS INSTITUTION OF OCEANOGRAPHY An exchange program with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography  (SIO), University of California, San Diego, permits Caltech graduate  students to enroll in and receive credit for graduate courses offered  by SIO. Arrangements should be made through the student™s major  Graduate Policies and Procedures 344option and the Graduate Office. The student must obtain the advance  approval of the instructors of courses to be taken at SIO. In some  cases, arrangements may be made for the student to be temporarily in full-time residence at SIO. Thesis research done partly at SIO may be arranged directly by the  student™s option and the staff of the appropriate research laboratories  at SIO, without the necessity of enrolling for SIO courses designated  for research; in this case the student will continue to be under the  supervision of the Caltech thesis adviser and will enroll for Caltech  research units. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATE DEGREES DEGREE OF MASTER OF SCIENCE The Master of Science degree is a professional degree designed to  prepare a student for teaching, for further graduate studies, or for  more advanced work in industry. Detailed requirements are based  primarily on professional studies, and the program should be planned  in consultation with the faculty in the appropriate discipline. Under  normal circumstances, the requirements for the master's degree can  be completed in one academic year. Students must declare candidacy  for the master's degree no later than the academic year in which the  final degree requirements have been met or upon separation from the  Institute. Students who are pursuing a doctoral degree and obtain a  Master™s along the way, must declare candidacy for the Master™s no  later than two weeks prior to conferral of the Ph.D. A student who enters the Institute holding a master's degree from  another institution will not normally be awarded a second master's  degree in the same field. A student will not be awarded two master's  degrees from the Institute. Special regulations for the master's degree are listed under each  graduate option. Several options do not offer a master's degree except  in special circumstances. Residence and Units of Graduate Work Required At least one academic year of residence at the Institute and a minimum  of 135 units of graduate work at the Institute subsequent to the bacca-laureate degree are required for the master's degree. Included in these  units are at least 27 units of free electives or of required studies in the  humanities numbered 100 or above. Advanced courses taken while  enrolled as a Caltech undergraduate student in excess of the bache -lor™s degree requirements may be counted toward the master's degree  requirements with the approval of the academic option representative  and the dean of graduate studies.To qualify for a master's degree, a student must complete the work  indicated in the section on special regulations for their option with a  grade-point average for the approved Master™s candidacy courses of at  least 1.9.345Graduate Degree Requirements In special cases, with the approval of the instructor, option represen -tative, and the dean of graduate studies, courses taken elsewhere before  enrollment at the Institute may be offered in place of specifically required  courses. An examination may be required to determine the acceptability  of such courses. Course credit, if granted, shall not count toward the 135- unit and residency requirements. Admission to M.S. CandidacyBy the third term of the academic year in which the student expects to  receive the degree, candidates should have completed a plan of study  in Regis, which must have the approval of the option representative  and, in some cases, of the research adviser. This approved plan of  study will constitute requirements for the degree. Any modifications  to the plan of study must be approved by the option representative  no later than two weeks before the degree is to be conferred. Some  options require a thesis or research report in addition to course require -ments. The thesis or research report must be approved by the research  adviser and option representative no later than two weeks before the  degree is to be conferred. For additional information and option-spe -cific requirements, please refer to the section ﬁSpecial Regulations for  Graduate Options.ﬂJoint B.S./M.S. Degree In exceptional cases, undergraduate students may be eligible to pur -sue a joint B.S./M.S. program of study to be completed within the four  years (12 terms) of the undergraduate program. Students should con -tact the graduate option representative to find out if the joint B.S./M.S.  degree is offered in a particular option. If so, students must follow the  normal procedures for admission to the graduate program. Students  admitted to the joint B.S./M.S. degree must complete a minimum of  486 units for the B.S. program and an additional 135 units for the M.S.  program with no overlapping of courses. In addition, a written plan of  study must be submitted to the Registrar™s Office for approval no later  than the fall term of the senior year. The plan of study should provide  detail of the courses that are proposed to satisfy each degree require -ment within the 12 terms of the B.S. program and once approved shall  constitute the requirements for the degree. Any changes to the plan  require written approval by the Registrar. If not completed within the  four years, students will be removed from the joint program and they,  and all their courses, will be attached to the B.S. program. Students  enrolled in the joint B.S./M.S. degree will be considered undergraduate  students and will not be eligible for graduate financial aid, graduate housing, or other graduate student privileges. ENGINEER™S DEGREE Engineer™s degrees are awarded in exceptional circumstances. The work  for an engineer™s degree must consist of advanced studies and research in  the field appropriate to the degree desired. It must conform to the special  requirements established for that degree and should be planned in con -sultation with the members of the faculty concerned. Students who have  been admitted to the terminal master's degree and wish to pursue further  346studies leading toward either the engineer™s or the Ph.D. degree must  file a petition (and in some cases must file a new application) to continue  graduate work toward the desired degree. Students who have received an  engineer™s degree will not be admitted for the Ph.D. ResidenceAt least eight terms of graduate residence subsequent to a Bachelor™s  degree equivalent to that given by the Institute are required for an  engineer™s degree. Of these, at least three terms must be at Caltech. It  must be understood that these are minimum requirements, and students  must often count on spending a somewhat longer time on graduate work.To qualify for an engineer™s degree, a student must complete the work  prescribed by the supervising committee with a grade-point average of at  least 1.9. Research work and the preparation of a thesis must constitute  no fewer than 55 units. More than 55 units may be required by certain  options, and the student should determine the particular requirements of  their option when establishing a program. Admission to CandidacyBefore the midpoint of the first term of the academic year in which the  student expects to receive the degree, they must complete a proposed  plan of study and, in consultation with the chair of the appropriate  division, will select a committee comprised of at least three members  of the professorial faculty to supervise the student™s work and to certify  its satisfactory completion. The student should consult with this com-mittee in planning the details of their work. The plan of study shall then constitute the requirements for the degree. Any modifications must be  approved by the option representative at least two weeks before the  degree is conferred. The student will be admitted to candidacy for the degree when the  supervising committee certifies (a) that all the special requirements  for the desired degree have been met, with the exception that cer -tain courses of not more than two terms in length may be taken after  admission to candidacy; (b) that the thesis research has been satisfac -torily started and can be finished at the expected date; (c) that the can-didate demonstrates competence in oral and written English.Admission to candidacy should be obtained by the midpoint of the term in which the degree is to be granted, but no later than the aca -demic year in which the final degree requirements have been met or  upon separation from the Institute. ThesisAt least two weeks before the degree is to be conferred, each student  is required to submit a thesis in accordance with the regulations that  govern the preparation of doctoral dissertations. These regulations may  be obtained from the Graduate Office website. The use of ﬁclassified™™ research as thesis material for any degree will  not be permitted. Exceptions to this rule can be made only under spe-cial circumstances, and then only when approval is given by the dean  of graduate studies before the research is undertaken. 347ExaminationAt the discretion of the option in which the degree is desired, a final  examination may be required. This examination would be conducted by  a committee appointed by the candidate™s supervising committee. DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHYThe degree of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) is conferred by the Institute pri -marily in recognition of breadth of scholarship, depth of research, and the  power to investigate problems independently and efficiently, rather than for  the completion of definite courses of study through a stated period of res -idence. The work for the degree must consist of research and the prepa -ration of a thesis describing it, and of systematic studies of an advanced  character, primarily in science or engineering. In addition, the candidate  must have clear self-expression in both oral and written English. Subject to the general supervision of the Committee on Graduate  Study, the student™s work for the Ph.D. degree is specifically directed by  the division in which they have chosen the major subject. Each student  should consult with their division concerning special divisional and option  requirements. AdmissionWith the approval of the dean of graduate studies, students are admit -ted to graduate standing by the option in which they choose their major work toward the Ph.D. degree. In some cases, applicants for the Ph.D.  may be required to complete requirements for the M.S. degree first;  however, this is not a general prerequisite for the Ph.D. Students who  have received an Engineer™s degree will not be admitted for the Ph.D.  degree. A student who holds a Ph.D. or the equivalent from another institu -tion will not normally be admitted to graduate standing at Caltech to pursue a second Ph.D. degree. A student will not normally be awarded  two Ph.D. degrees from the Institute. Minor Programs of Study The Institute does not require a minor for the Ph.D. degree, but the  individual options may have minor requirements as part of their require -ments for the major. A student may undertake a minor program of study in most options  as specified in this catalog under the section ﬁSpecial Regulations of Graduate Options.ﬂ Completion of a minor program of study is recog -nized on the diploma by the statement ﬁ–and by additional studies constituting a minor in [name of option].ﬂA minor program of study should be at a level of study in the minor  substantially beyond that typically acquired by students as part of their  major requirements. Most options require 45 units or more, including at  least one 200-level course and a coherent program of the supporting  100-level courses. The faculty of the minor option may approve a pro -posed minor program on the basis of overall class performance and/or  by an oral examination.Detailed requirements for minor options are listed under the individu -Graduate Degree Requirements 348al options. Students cannot use courses required by their major option  in fulfillment of the minor requirement. ResidenceAt least three academic years (12 terms) of residence subsequent to a  baccalaureate degree equivalent to that given by the Institute are required  for the Ph.D. Of this, at least one year (4 terms) must be in residence at the  Institute. It should be understood that these are minimum requirements,  and students must usually count on spending a somewhat longer time in  residence. A student whose undergraduate work has been insufficient in  amount or too narrowly specialized, or whose preparation in their special  field is inadequate, should plan upon spending increased time in work for  the degree. However, no student will be allowed to continue work toward the Ph.D.  degree for more than six academic years (24 terms) of graduate residence,  without a petition approved by the dean of graduate studies. This petition  must include a plan and schedule for completion, agreed upon and signed  by the student, the thesis adviser, and the option representative. RegistrationContinuity of registration must be maintained until all requirements  for the Ph.D. have been completed, with the exception of authorized leaves. Registration is typically required for the term in which the thesis  defense is undertaken.Thesis Advisers and Committee ChairsThe thesis adviser must be a professorial faculty member, defined as  professor, associate professor, or assistant professor on a full-time,  tenure-track appointment at Caltech. Research faculty and emeritus  faculty can supervise research, but the official thesis adviser must be  a member of the professorial faculty. Expectations for the relationship  between graduate students and faculty advisers are discussed under  Guidelines for Graduate Student Advising (page 338). Progress through the graduate program is monitored in part by the  candidacy, thesis advisory, and thesis examination committees detailed  in the following sections. Each committee has a chair who is respon -sible for running the meeting, summarizing the outcome, and working with the graduate student and adviser as appropriate. The chair of each  committee is a professorial faculty member distinct from the adviser. Admission to CandidacyOn the recommendation of the option concerned, the dean of graduate  studies will admit a student to candidacy for the degree of Doctor of  Philosophy after the student has been admitted to work toward the Ph.D.  and has been in residence at least one term; has initiated a program of  study approved by the major option and, if needed, by the minor option;  has demonstrated, by written or oral examination, a comprehensive  grasp of the major and minor subjects and of subjects fundamental to  them; has displayed the ability for clear self-expression in both oral and  written English; and has shown ability in carrying on research in a sub -349ject approved by the option concerned. Option regulations concerning  admission to candidacy are given in a later section.  Depending upon option regulations, candidates will either be  assigned a candidacy committee by the option representative or must  independently select appropriate members to serve on the candidacy  committee. A candidacy committee consists of a minimum of three  members, two of whom must be professorial faculty. Emeritus faculty,  research faculty, JPL staff and external scholars may serve on the can -didacy committee, with approval of the option representative and the  dean of graduate studies in advance of the candidacy examination. The  student should ensure that all members of the committee are available  during the examination period and that they are willing to provide timely  and appropriate feedback.  A student not admitted to candidacy by the end of the third year or  twelfth term of graduate residence at the Institute must petition the dean  of graduate studies for permission to register for further work. Candidacy (and permission to register) may be withdrawn by formal  action of the option from a student whose research is not satisfactory, or  for other compelling reasons. However, the option must petition through its  division chair to the dean of graduate studies before taking such action. Thesis Advisory CommitteeEach Ph.D. student is assigned a Thesis Advisory Committee consisting  of a minimum of three professorial faculty members. Emeritus faculty,  research faculty, JPL staff and external scholars may serve on the thesis  examination committee with approval of the option representative and the  dean of graduate studies. Following candidacy, or by the fourth year of  graduate study, a student will have an annual meeting as specified by the  option with either the thesis advisory committee, the committee chair, or  the option representative (if not the advisor), to discuss progress towards  completing the thesis and future plans.  Thesis ExaminationEach Ph.D. candidate shall undergo broad oral examination on the major  subject, the scope of the thesis, and its significance in relation to the major  subject. The thesis examination, subject to the approval of the dean of  graduate studies, may be taken after admission to candidacy whenever  the candidate is prepared; however, it must take place at least three weeks  before the degree is to be conferred. The thesis examination may be written in part, and may be subdivided  into parts or given all at one time at the discretion of the options con -cerned. The student must declare their intent to defend by completing  the examination notification in Regis not less than two weeks before the  date of the examination. A thesis examination committee consists of four  members, with a minimum of three professorial faculty. Emeritus faculty,  research faculty, JPL staff and external scholars may serve on the thesis  examination committee with approval of the option representative and the  dean of graduate studies in advance of the thesis examination.Graduate Degree Requirements 350ThesisAt least two weeks before the final oral examination, the candidate should  provide a draft copy of a completed thesis to the Graduate Office for  proofreading and to the members of the thesis examination committee.  The date of the examination and the composition of the thesis examination  committee should be posted in Regis at least two weeks before the final  defense is scheduled. In general, registration is required for the term in  which the thesis defense is undertaken. Approval of the dean of graduate  studies is required for any student seeking to enroll for subsequent terms  following the thesis defense. A student not receiving Caltech funding, may  petition the dean of graduate studies for a tuition waiver if the student  schedules the examination by the third Friday of the term in which the  examination will be taken.The last date to upload the final, corrected thesis is the fifth week of the  succeeding term if the candidate defended their thesis during the previous  summer or the fall or winter terms; or two weeks before the degree is to  be conferred if the candidate defended their thesis during the month of  May. It is required that all Ph.D. candidates submit an electronic copy of  their dissertation, which the Caltech Library will then archive and make  available online as part of the Networked Digital Library of Theses and  Dissertations (NDLTD), an international organization that allows researchers  to globally search a database of electronic theses and dissertations. For  special option regulations concerning theses or the exam composition,  see specific graduate options.Before uploading the final, corrected thesis, it is the candidate™s respon -sibility to obtain approval of the thesis by the option representative and all  members of the thesis examination committee.With the approval of the option concerned, a portion of the thesis may  consist of one or more articles published jointly by the candidate and  members of the Institute staff or other coauthors. In any case, however, a  substantial portion of the thesis must be the candidate™s own exposition of  their own work.The use of ﬁclassified™™ research as thesis material for any degree is not  permitted. Exceptions to this rule can be made only under special circum -stances, and then only when approval is given by the dean of graduate  studies before the research is undertaken. Regulations and directions for the preparation of theses may be  obtained from the Graduate Office website, and should be followed care -fully by the candidate. Thesis templates are also available on the Library  website, as is information regarding thesis deposits, embargo policies and  copyright issues.SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS  In order to continue in a degree program and to receive financial aid at  Caltech, graduate students must maintain satisfactory academic prog -ress toward completion of their degree. Continuity of registration must be  maintained until all requirements for the degree being sought have been  completed, with the exception of authorized sabbaticals.The Master of Science degree requires at least three terms of residence  at the Institute and a minimum of 135 units of graduate work with a grade-point average of at least 1.9. A master's degree cannot take more than  two years without a petition approved by the dean of graduate studies. 351The Engineer™s degree must consist of advanced studies and research  in the field appropriate to the degree desired. At least eight terms of grad -uate residence are required with a minimum 1.9 overall grade-point aver -age. The Engineer™s degree cannot take more than 12 terms to complete  without a petition approved by the dean of graduate studies. For the Doctor of Philosophy, at least 12 terms of residence are  required, but the necessary study and research typically can be complet -ed in six years or less. The work for the degree consists of research and  the preparation of a thesis describing it, and of systematic studies of an  advanced character, primarily in science or engineering. The requirements for each degree include special regulations estab -lished by each option and detailed in the Institute Catalog for the year of  initial registration. Many options require a C grade or better in particular  courses or groups of courses. Hence, a limited number of courses may  be repeated while still maintaining a status of satisfactory academic  progress and would count toward the 36-unit-per-term requirement. A full- time graduate student must register for (and complete) 36 units per term,  including the summer term. Approval of the dean of graduate studies is  required before dropping any course that brings a student below 36 units.  The treatment of incomplete grades and withdrawals is specified on pages  30-34. Satisfactory academic progress is checked each academic term by  the Graduate Office. The special regulations for the options typically include the completion  of specific courses, oral and/or written examinations, petitions, research  requirements, etc., by specific times. Satisfactory academic progress is  judged by the options against these regulations, and revocation of permis -sion to register may be recommended by the option to the dean of gradu -ate studies prior to or in response to the student™s petition for admission to  candidacy. Further, even after admission to candidacy, the candidacy (and  permission to register) may be withdrawn by formal action of an option  for a student whose research is not satisfactory, or for other compelling  reasons. However, the option must petition through its division chair to the  dean of graduate studies before taking such action. A decision to revoke  or withdraw permission to register may be appealed in writing within ten  days to the vice president for student affairs or designee. A Ph.D. student who has not been admitted to candidacy by the  beginning of the fourth year (12 terms) must petition the dean of graduate  studies for permission to register for further work. In addition, no Ph.D.  student will be allowed to register for more than 24 terms without a peti -tion approved by the dean of graduate studies. This petition must include a plan and schedule for completion, agreed  upon and signed by the student, the Thesis Advisory Committee chair, and  the option representative. GRADUATE EXPENSES  The tuition and fees charge for all students registering for graduate  work is currently $58,467.00 per academic year, payable at the beginning  of each term, fall (9/27/2021), winter (1/3/2022), and spring (3/28/2022).  Graduate students who cannot devote full time to their studies are allowed  to register only under special circumstances. Students desiring permission  Graduate Expenses352to register for fewer than 36 units must therefore petition the dean of grad -uate studies for an underload.  The payment of tuition by graduate students is required (a) without ref -erence to the character of the work by the student, which may consist of  research, independent reading, or writing a thesis or other dissertation, as  well as attendance at regular classes; (b) without reference to the number  of terms in which the student has already been in residence; and (c) with -out reference to the status of the student as an appointee of the Institute,  except that members of the academic staff of rank of instructor or higher  are not required to pay tuition.  Unpaid BillsAll bills owed the Institute must be paid when due. Any student whose bills  are past due may be refused registration for the following term. All gradu -ate students with an outstanding bursar™s bill balance of $1,500.00 or more  will have a hold placed on their registration for the subsequent term the  day before online registration opens. Diplomas will not be released until  the bursar™s account is paid in full. Caltech ID Card Charges If a graduate student owes more than $1,500.00, the student™s charging  privileges will be suspended. Charging privileges will be reactivated once  students have paid their bill in full with the Bursar™s Office. EXPENSE SUMMARY 2021-2022 General:Tuition and fees $58,467.00Other:General Deposit$100 Books and supplies (approx.) $1,428.00 Contact Bursar™s Office  for audit fee. Room Catalina apartments:4 bedroom apt. $660.00 per person per month (plus utilities) 2 bedroom apt. $785.00 per person per month (plus utilities) 1 bedroom apt. $1,330.00 per apt. per month (plus utilities) Fees are subject to change at the discretion of the Institute. Fees for Late PaymentA $50.00 late fee penalty may be charged by the Bursar™s Office for fail -ure to clear a past-due account at the beginning of instruction. 353Fees for Late RegistrationRegistration is not complete until the student has registered for a pro -gram approved by their adviser and has paid tuition and other fees. A  penalty fee of $50 is assessed for failure to register within five days of  the scheduled dates.Honor System MattersMonies owed to the Institute resulting from a disciplinary matter may  be collected through the Bursar™s Office, at the request of the dean of  graduate studies. Housing FacilitiesThe Catalina Central complex provides approximately 152 single rooms  in four-bedroom furnished units. Another, Catalina North, has 156 sin -gle rooms in two-bedroom furnished units, and Catalina South has 78  single rooms in two-bedroom furnished units, and 29 one-bedroom fur -nished units. These apartments are also available to married or coupled  students.Rates for housing vary, depending upon the accommodations and  services provided. A contract is required to live in these houses for the  academic year. Complete information can be obtained at  www.housing.caltech.edu. There is one Residential Life Coordinator (RLC) and four Resident  Associates (RAs) in the Catalina Complex. An RLC is a specially trained full-time university employee, specializing in college student develop-ment, community building, counseling, and crisis intervention. The RLC supervises the RAs on programming and overall student wellness. The  RLC also assists Housing with the management and daily operations of the complex. There are also Catalina Community Associates (student  volunteers) who work with the RLC and RAs on programming and com -munity building in the Catalinas.The Institute also owns a limited number of apartments and sin-gle-family houses that are available for rental, on a lease basis, to sin -gle or married/partnered graduate students or graduate students with  families. Because of limited availability, there is a waiting list for these  properties. For additional information and application, go to housing. caltech.edu.Students preferring to live in non-Institute housing typically pay  approximately $1,000 to $1,300 per month/each, in rent for a shared  apartment, and somewhat more for a private apartment. Please note  that the Institute cannot make negotiations for individual housing off  campus.Dining FacilitiesGraduate students are granted the privilege of joining the Athenaeum  (faculty club), which affords the possibility of contact with fellow graduate  students and with others using the Athenaeum, including the Associates of  Caltech, distinguished visitors, and members of the professional staffs of  the Huntington Library and the Caltech.The Chandler Dining Hall, located on the campus, is open Monday  Graduate Expenses354through Friday. Breakfast, lunch, and snacks are served cafeteria style.  Café at Broad is open for lunch, Monday through Friday. Health ServicesHealth services available to graduate students are explained in section  one of this Catalog.FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  Caltech offers in each of its options a number of fellowships, tuition schol -arships, and graduate assistantships. In general, tuition scholarships may  be for full or partial tuition charges; assistantships provide stipends; and  fellowships often provide both tuition scholarship awards and stipends.  Graduate assistants are eligible for tuition awards. Appointments to fellow -ships, scholarships, and assistantships are decided yearly by the student™s  academic option.Graduate students receiving any form of financial award from the  Institute are required to report to the dean of graduate studies any finan -cial aid from other sources. With prior written approval from the dean of  graduate studies, students may be allowed to accept outside employment  if the time commitment does not interfere with their graduate studies. The  number of hours per week spent on outside employment must be reported  to the dean of graduate studies.GRADUATE ASSISTANTSHIPS  Graduate assistants help with teaching, laboratory work, or perform  research of a character that affords useful academic experience while  permitting a full academic schedule of courses. The specific research  and teaching obligations of graduate assistants are agreed upon with the  adviser. Caltech graduate students often receive a combination of teaching  and research assistantships; however, the total work commitment cannot  exceed 20 hours per week during the academic year. Summer appoint -ments can be greater, with assignments up to 40 hours per week. A grad -uate student who undertakes activities related to the Institute aggregating  more than 62 hours per week (in class, research assistantship, and teach -ing assistantship hours) must petition the dean of graduate studies.  Graduate assistant stipends are based on four quarters paid monthly  throughout the year. Students are also entitled to two weeks of annual  vacation and Institute holidays. Students should prearrange their vaca -tion schedule with their adviser. When necessary, graduate assistants  may arrange for medical leave, pregnancy leave, bonding leave, or per -sonal leave. Any questions should be referred to the dean of graduate  studies.Teaching Assistantships A full teaching assistantship usually requires 20 hours per week to be  devoted to teaching and to the related activities of class preparation,  grading, and consulting with students. In general, teaching obligations  are confined to the 12 weeks of the academic terms, excluding summer.  355A student may not be a teaching assistant for a course in which they are  enrolled. Only teaching assistants with good oral English and who have  fulfilled the Institute English proficiency requirement are permitted to teach  sections.  All teaching assistants, including undergraduate students with teaching  responsibilities, are required to attend teaching-assistant training before  payment can be processed. Training sessions are conducted by the  Center for Teaching, Learning, and Outreach (CTLO) and occur in the first  week of the fall term, typically during orientation, and at least once per  term.  Teaching assistants must familiarize themselves with Caltech™s policy  on harassment (see page 118) and follow other policies related to teach -ing discussed in the required training. Classes should foster academic  achievement in a ﬁhassle-freeﬂ environment. Teaching assistants should  not attempt to date a student in their class, and should disqualify them-selves from teaching a section in which a spouse or current partner is  enrolled. Please see the Graduate Studies Office for additional policies informa -tion at www.gradoffice.caltech.edu/financialsupport/assistantships .Research Assistantships Research assistantships typically are 20 hours per week during the aca -demic year, but can be as much as 40 hours per week during the summer.  The specific duties are decided upon by the adviser. Graduate Scholarships, Fellowships, and Research Funds  The Institute awards endowed fellowships and scholarships for tuition and/ or stipends to graduate students of exceptional ability. Students are also  strongly encouraged to apply for scholarships and fellowships from federal  and private agencies and organizations to support their graduate studies.  LoansSeveral types of loans are available to graduate students. To qualify for any  of these, a student must demonstrate financial need and must maintain  satisfactory academic progress in the course of study for which they are  enrolled. Application forms and further information are available from the  Financial Aid Office. Refund and Repayment PolicyCaltech has established an equitable refund policy for students who find it  necessary to withdraw or take a sabbatical from the Institute. Students who officially withdraw or take a sabbatical from the Institute  during an academic term may receive a tuition refund (see page 355).  Students living in Caltech housing may also be eligible for a partial refund  from the Housing Office. When granting refunds to financial aid recipients or graduate assistants,  it is Caltech™s policy to return the refund, in most cases, to the original  account.Prizes and Awards 356PRIZES AND AWARDS Advocating Change Together (ACT) Award  Given by the Caltech Y, this award allows students to learn about a  global, national, or local issue by immersing themselves with activists working on a cause over the summer and then challenges them to edu-cate others by creating and leading programs designed to raise aware -ness on campus the following year. Amori Doctoral Prize in CMS Established in 2017 by Michael Amori (MS ™07), this prize honors out-standing dissertations in the computing and mathematical sciences during the current academic year. Awardees are selected by a commit -tee of computing and mathematical sciences faculty each spring.Apostol Award for Excellence in Teaching in Mathematics  Named in honor of Tom Apostol, who taught at Caltech for over 50  years, this award recognizes excellence in teaching by graduate and  undergraduate teaching assistants in mathematics. Charles D. Babcock Award  Voted on by members of the aeronautics faculty, this award is given  to a graduate student whose achievements in teaching or other assis-tance to students have made a significant contribution to the aeronau -tics department.William F. Ballhaus Prize  This prize recognizes aeronautics students for outstanding doctoral  dissertations.The Bhansali Family Prize in Computer Science Established in 2001 by Vineer Bhansali (B.S. ™87, M.S. ™87) in memory  of his grandfather, Mag Raj Bhansali, this prize is given to an under -graduate student for outstanding research in computer science in the  current academic year. Awardees are selected by a committee of com -puter science faculty. Bhansali Family Dissertation Prize in Computer Science Established in 2018 by Vineer Bhansali (B.S. ™87, M.S. ™87) in memory  of his grandfather, Mag Raj Bhansali, this prize is given to honor out -standing dissertations in computer science, broadly defined, during the  current academic year. Awardees are selected by a committee of com -puter science faculty each spring. Rolf D. Buhler Memorial Award in Aeronautics  This award is given to an aeronautics student for outstanding academic  achievement in the master™s program. Caltech Alumni Association Spirit Award  Commemorating extraordinary activities by Caltech undergraduate  students, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars who best exemplify the spirit, tradition, and values of Caltech, this award is given  357only when the Alumni Association finds that exceptional activities have occurred that merit this special recognition. W. P. Carey & Co., Inc., Prizes in Applied Mathematics   Established by William P. Carey and W. P. Carey & Co., Inc., this prize is  awarded to outstanding doctoral dissertations in applied mathematics  in the current academic year.  Awardees are selected by a committee  of applied mathematics faculty. Centennial Prize for the Best Thesis in Mechanical and Civil Engineering This prize, awarded annually to a Ph.D. candidate in applied mechan -ics, civil engineering, or mechanical engineering, is given to a student whose doctoral thesis is judged to be the most original and significant by a faculty committee appointed annually by the executive officer  for mechanical and civil engineering. This prize was established with gifts from alumni following the Mechanical Engineering Centennial  Celebration in 2007.Richard Bruce Chapman Memorial Award   This award is given to a graduate student in hydrodynamics who has  distinguished themselves in research in the Division of Engineering and  Applied Science.Ben P.C. Chou Doctoral Prize in IST  This prize recognizes outstanding doctoral dissertations in the broad  area of information science and technology. The prize was established  by Ben P.C. Chou™s wife, June, and his son, Scott (B.S. ™86), as a last -ing tribute to his lifetime dedication to the pursuit of scholarly research  and foregoing personal gain in favor of always doing the right thing for  society. Robert F. Christy Prize for an Outstanding Doctoral Thesis in  Theoretical Physics This prize is given annually to a student who has produced an out -standing thesis in theoretical physics. Established in 2018, this prize  honors the memory of Robert F. Christy, former provost and professor  of theoretical physics. Milton and Francis Clauser Doctoral Prize  This prize is given to a Ph.D. candidate* whose thesis is judged by a committee of the Faculty Board to exhibit significant new work, inge -nuity, and originality, and to have the greatest potential to open new  avenues of human thought and endeavor. Dr. William "Bil" Clemons, Jr. Agent of Change Award  This award is given to individuals embodying servant leadership  through a demonstrated commitment to steering social change within  the Caltech community, taking initiative and having the vision to trans -late a need into actionable steps to create legacy and a more inclusive  campus climate, engage in advocacy and organize efforts with clear  deliverables.Prizes and Awards 358CMS and IST Gradient for Change Award  The CMS and IST Gradient for Change Awards honor students, post -docs, staff, and faculty in the Caltech community who demonstrate  exceptional efforts to make Caltech and/or the broader scientific  community a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment. The  awards recognize and highlight individual contributors or small teams  who are considered agents of change, community leaders, and/or allies  to historically marginalized group(s) in the information sciences, includ -ing computer science, applied mathematics, and beyond.Donald Coles Prize in Aeronautics This prize is given to the graduating Ph.D. student in aeronautics  whose thesis displays the best design of an experiment or the best design for a piece of experimental equipment.COMPASS CMP Outstanding Mentor Award  This award recognizes individuals who demonstrated a willingness  to share their knowledge to enhance the professional and personal  development of their mentee(s), provided emotional and moral support  and encouragement, enhanced or helped facilitate integration into the Caltech community, while providing access to career related informa -tion and exposure to various professional resources, opportunities,  networks, and other role models, promoted the mentee™s sense of  competence, confidence, and belongingCOMPASS CMP Outstanding Mentee Award  This award recognizes individuals who demonstrated a sincere desire  to succeed as a student and is committed to their personal devel-opment, open and willing to learn from their mentor and receptive to  advice and counsel, worked with their mentor to establish realistic  goals and demonstrated a commitment to carrying them out.France Córdova Graduate Student Fund in Physics This fund provides resources for one to three graduate students  annually to support research-related expenses. Each awardee shall  be recognized as either a Neugebauer, Garmire, or Tombrello Scholar.  Preference shall be given to student(s) studying broadly in areas in  which professors Gerry Neugebauer, Gordon Garmire, and Thomas  Tombrello made contributions. James A. Cullen Memorial Fellowship Fund This memorial fund is awarded annually to a graduate student or stu -dents who have demonstrated outstanding academic achievement in physics.Demetriades-Tsafka-Kokkalis Prize in Biotechnology or Related  Fields This prize, awarded annually, recognizes a Ph.D. candidate for the best  thesis, publication, or discovery in biotechnology or related fields at the  Institute in the preceding 12 months. This prize is made possible by a gift  from Anna Kokkalis Demetriades and Sterge T. Demetriades (Eng. ™58). 359Demetriades-Tsafka-Kokkalis Prize in Entrepreneurship or Related  Fields This prize, awarded annually, recognizes the best business plan or  proposal, start-up, thesis, publication, discovery, or related efforts by  student(s) in entrepreneurship or related fields at the Institute in the  preceding 12 months. This prize is made possible by a gift from Anna  Kokkalis Demetriades and Sterge T. Demetriades (Eng ™58). Demetriades-Tsafka-Kokkalis Prize in Environmentally Benign  Renewable Energy Sources or Related Fields  This prize, awarded annually, recognizes a Ph.D. candidate for the  best thesis, publication, discovery, or related efforts in benign renew -able energy sources or related fields at the Institute in the preceding  12 months. This prize is made possible by a gift from Anna Kokkalis  Demetriades and Sterge T. Demetriades (Eng. ™58). Demetriades-Tsafka-Kokkalis Prize in Nanotechnology or Related  Fields This prize, awarded annually, recognizes a Ph.D. candidate for the best  thesis, publication, or discovery in nanotechnology or related fields at  the Institute in the preceding 12 months. This prize is made possible by  a gift from Anna Kokkalis Demetriades and Sterge T. Demetriades (Eng.  ™58).Demetriades-Tsafka-Kokkalis Prize in Seismo-Engineering,  Prediction, and Protection  This prize, awarded annually, recognizes a Ph.D. candidate for the best  thesis, publication, or discovery in seismo-engineering, prediction, and  protection at the Institute in the preceding 12 months. This prize is  made possible by a gift from Anna Kokkalis Demetriades and Sterge T.  Demetriades (Eng. ™58).EAS New Horizons Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Award  This award recognizes and honors individuals within the EAS communi -ty who have actively contributed to the Divi-sion™s goal to be a diverse,  equitable and inclusive engineering community. Constantin G. Economou Memorial Prize This prize is awarded to a chemical engineering graduate student dis -tinguished by outstanding research accomplishments and exemplary  attitude while fulfilling candidacy requirements for the Ph.D. degree. Everhart Distinguished Graduate Student Lecture Series This award recognizes graduate students for their exemplary presen -tation skills and research ability. Awardees participate in the Everhart  Lecture Series, a forum that is meant to encourage interdisciplinary  interaction among graduate students and faculty, to share ideas about  recent research developments. Lawrence L. and Audrey W. Ferguson Prize   The Ferguson prize is awarded to the graduating Ph.D. candidate in  Prizes and Awards 360biology and biological engineering who has produced the outstanding  doctoral thesis for the past year. Henry Ford II Scholar Awards   This award recognizes either the engineering students with the best  academic record at the end of the third year of undergraduate study or  the engineering students with the best first-year record in the graduate  program. Graduate Deans™ Award  This award is given to a Ph.D. candidate or candidates who, throughout  their graduate study at the Institute, have made great contributions to  graduate life and whose qualities of leadership and responsibility have  been outstanding. The Lucy Guernsey Service Award  This award is awarded to one or two students who have provid -ed exceptional service to the Caltech Y and/or the community, are  involved with service projects, have demonstrated leadership in com -munity and volunteer service efforts, and exemplify a spirit of service. Hans G. Hornung Prize This prize is awarded for the best oral Ph.D. defense presentation by a  student advised by aerospace faculty. The decision is made by a com -mittee of students who attend all thesis presentations for the year. Scott Russell Johnson Prize for Excellence in Graduate Studies This prize is awarded to continuing graduate students for excellence  and extraordinary progress in research and/or excellence in teaching in  mathematics.Scott Russell Johnson Prize for Excellence as a First-Year Graduate  Student This prize rewards excellence in first-year graduate research in mathe -matics.Scott Russell Johnson Graduate Dissertation Prize in Mathematics This prize is awarded for the best graduate dissertation in mathematics. Kalam Prize for Aerospace Engineering This prize, made possible by Dr. Abdul Kalam, the 11th president of  India and an aerospace engineer, is awarded to a student in the aero -space engineering master™s program whose academic performance  was exemplary and who shows high potential for future achievements  at Caltech.  R.K. Kar Award for Research in Physics  This award is given annually to an outstanding graduate student who  is exceptional in their physics studies and research (emphasis on con -densed matter physics).John O. Ledyard Prize for Graduate Research in Social Science The prize rewards the best second-year paper by a graduate student in  361Social Science or Social Decision Neuroscience. The prize was estab -lished by Susan G. Davis in recognition of John O. Ledyard™s dedica -tion to developing graduate students as independent researchers and  his service to the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences. The prize is awarded annually by a committee of social science faculty to a  sole-authored work and carries a cash award of $1000. The Herbert Newby McCoy Award   This award is given to one or more chemistry doctoral students for out -standing contributions to the science of chemistry. Dr. Nagendranath Reddy Biological Sciences Thesis Prize  The Reddy prize is awarded to the graduating female Ph.D. candidate  in the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering who has produced  the outstanding thesis in the biological sciences or bioengineering for the past year. Eleanor Searle Prize in Law, Politics, and Institutions  Established in 1999 by friends and colleagues to honor Eleanor Searle, the Caltech professor who had the distinction of being the first woman  at the Institute to receive a named professorship, this prize is awarded  annually to an undergraduate or graduate student whose work in his -tory or the social sciences exemplifies Searle™s interests in the use of  power, government, and law. Ernest E. Sechler Memorial Award in Aeronautics   This award recognizes an aeronautics student who has made the  most significant contribution to the teaching and research efforts of  GALCIT (Graduate Aerospace Laboratories of the California Institute  of Technology). Preference is given to students working in structural  mechanics.Dr. Fred Shair Award for Program Diversity  Dr. Fred Shair award is given to individuals who stand out as strong  supporters of programs that increase the diversity and pluralism  in practice at Caltech. Dr. Shair was a member of the Chemical  Engineering faculty. One of his great accomplishments and contribu -tions to the campus was the creation of the Summer Undergraduate  Research (SURF) program in 1979. He later included high achieving  students from campuses across the country in an effort to support  equity in access to Caltech™s research communities. John Stager Stemple Memorial Prize in Physics  This prize is awarded annually to a graduate student in physics for out -standing progress in research as demonstrated by an excellent perfor -mance on the oral Ph.D. candidacy exam.R. Bruce Stewart Prize This prize is awarded annually to a graduate teaching assistant in phys -ics who demonstrates, in the broadest sense, unusual ability, creativity,  and innovation in undergraduate and graduate classroom or laboratory  teaching.Prizes and Awards 362Thomas A. Tisch Prize for Graduate Teaching in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences The Graduate Teaching in CMS Awards were established in 2016 with  a gift from Microsoft and then endowed through the generosity of  Thomas A. Tisch (BS ™61). The prize and honorarium are awarded to  a graduate and an undergraduate student for outstanding teaching  and course development in computing and mathematical sciences. Awardees are selected by a committee of CMS faculty members. Charles Wilts Prize   The Charles Wilts Prize is awarded annually for outstanding indepen -dent research in electrical engineering leading to a Ph.D degree. This  prize was established in 1992 to honor Charles Wilts, a member of the electrical engineering faculty from 1947Œ1975, who made substantial  contributions to the Department of Electrical Engineering.Women Mentoring Women Helen McBride Outstanding Mentee  Award  Women Mentoring Women Helen McBride Outstanding Mentee Award  is given to women who demonstrated a sincere desire to succeed as  a researcher and is committed to her personal development, open and  willing to learn from her mentor and receptive to advice and counsel,  worked with her mentor to establish realistic goals and demonstrated a  commitment to carrying them out.Women Mentoring Women Candace Rypisi Outstanding Mentor  Award  Women Mentoring Women Candace Rypisi Outstanding Mentor Award  is given to women with a demonstrated willingness to share their  knowledge to enhance the professional and personal development of  their mentee(s), providing emotional and moral support and encour -agement, enhancing or helping facilitate access to career related infor -mation and exposure to various professional resources, opportunities,  networks, and other role models, promoting the mentee™s sense of  competence, confidence, and belonging. Note: Prizes and awards may be subject to federal and state income  tax.363SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR  GRADUATE OPTIONS   AEROSPACE (A e)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The Institute offers graduate programs in aerospace leading to the degrees  of Master of Science in Aeronautics and Space Engineering, and Doctor  of Philosophy in Aeronautics and Space Engineering. The programs are  designed to provide intense education in the foundations of the aeronau -tical and space sciences, with emphasis on research and analytical, com -putational, and experimental methods. Entering graduate students should  have a thorough background in undergraduate mathematics, physics, and  engineering science.In working toward a degree in aerospace, a student may pursue major  study in one of the following areas: physics of fluids, physics of solids and  mechanics of materials, structural mechanics, space technology, compu -tational solid mechanics, computational and theoretical fluid dynamics,  aeronautical engineering and propulsion, biomechanics of fluids and sol -ids, technical fluid mechanics, control of aerospace systems and materials. While research and course work in the aerospace option at the Institute  cover a very broad range of subjects, a choice of one of the above fields  allows students to focus their activities while taking advantage of the  flexibility offered by the breadth of interests of the Graduate aerospace  Laboratories (GALCIT).  In consultation with his or her adviser, a student will design a program  of study in one of the above fields, consisting of the fundamental courses  described in the regulations for the separate degrees listed below, and  of electives selected from the list of aerospace-related courses. This will  ensure that the graduating student will be well-qualified for a career in  aerospace and related fields. Examinations, Committees, and Student Responsibilities To help students achieve satisfactory progress in their academic pursuits,  the aerospace faculty provides for the following committee and individual  support.Upon beginning the first year of the aerospace program, each student  is assigned a faculty (course) adviser whose research field matches the  interests of the student as described in the student™s statement of purpose  in his or her admissions application. The first-year adviser will guide the  student in choosing a set of courses appropriate to the students™ interests  while ensuring the first-year academic requirements (see below) are met.  Students wishing to pursue studies leading to the Ph.D. must select  and be accepted by a research adviser by the end of the spring term of  the first year of residence and are required to pass a qualifying exam -ination in the first term of the second year. Having passed the qualifying  examination, the student pursues research under the supervision of the  research adviser until they are ready to enter candidacy for the Ph.D. At  Special Regulations364this point, a four-member Candidacy Examination Committee that includes  the student™s research adviser is assembled and administers a Candidacy  Examination to ensure the student has the appropriate knowledge and  tools to successfully complete his or her chosen research activities. The  Candidacy Committee is chaired by a faculty member other than the  research adviser. The Candidacy Examination should be administered by  the start of the second term of the third year of residence, but in any case,  must be successfully completed by the end of that year in order to comply  with Institute requirements.  Conferral of the Ph.D. degree is contingent on satisfactorily passing  the thesis examination before a committee consisting of four examiners,  which may, but does not need to, have the same membership as the  Candidacy Committee. Students may find further information concerning  special option requirements and the requisite option forms on the GALCIT  website.AE Master™s Degrees  Master™s Degree in Aeronautics and Master™s Degree in Space  Engineering The master™s degree program in aeronautics or space engineering is a  one-year program that provides advanced training in the areas of aero -nautics or space engineering beyond that covered in a four-year under -graduate program. The program consists of a set of five core courses  (see details below). There is no research requirement, nor is a thesis  required to obtain the degree. The courses required for the master™s  degree must be completed in one year. AdmissionStudents whose highest qualification is a baccalaureate degree equiva -lent to that given by the Institute are eligible to seek admission to work  toward the master™s degree. Students are asked to submit course tran -scripts and letters of recommendation as well as evidence of English  language proficiency as detailed in the graduate application. The GRE  exam is not required and submitted scores will not be considered for  the 2021 admissions process in Aerospace. It should be noted that  the graduate program at GALCIT is primarily focused on Ph.D.-level  research and so priority in admission is given to those who plan to ulti -mately perform Ph.D.-level research.   Course RequirementsA program of study consists of courses totaling at least 135 units; of  these, at least 81 units must be chosen from one of the following cur -ricular tracks: Aeronautics track Two 27-unit course sequences chosen from:      Experimental methods (Ae 104abc), 27 units.365Space Engineering trackOne 27-unit course sequence chosen from:    Autonomy and control (CDS 131, Ae 103ab), 27 unitsSpace engineering (Ae 105abc), 27 units.  aerospace students in either the Aeronautics or Space Engineering  track are required to enroll in a sequence of mathematics courses totaling  27 units appropriate to the student™s chosen track and selected in coor -dination with their first-year advisers. Examples of appropriate courses  include ACM/IDS 104, ACM 100ab, ACM 101ab, etc.Finally, all first-year students are required to enroll in aerospace  Engineering Seminar (3 units Ae 150abc).A grade of C or higher must be achieved in all the required classes  unless they are only offered pass/fail, in which case a pass must be  achieved in each class. For both the Aeronautics and Space Engineering  master™s degrees, the remaining 27 units are elective and are to be chosen  from courses at Caltech that support the broader goals of the respective  programs, subject to the approval of the student™s adviser. Students must  have a proposed program of courses approved by their adviser prior to  registration for the first term of work toward the degree. Admission to More Advanced Degrees Students who successfully complete the requirements for the master™s  degree and who wish to pursue the more advanced degree of Doctor  of Philosophy (Ph.D.) must file a petition to continue work toward the  desired degree. All students working for the Ph.D. degree are expected  to register for and attend the advanced seminar (Ae 208 abc) for a peri -od of at least two years. AE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  AdmissionStudents with a baccalaureate degree equivalent to that given by the  Institute are eligible to seek admission to work toward the degree of doctor  of philosophy (Ph.D.) in aeronautics or space engineering. Students are  asked to submit course transcripts and letters of recommendation as well  as evidence of English language proficiency as detailed in the graduate  application. The GRE exam is not required and submitted scores will not be  considered for the 2021 admissions process in Aerospace.  Course RequirementsThe course requirements for the first year of the Ph.D. degree are identical to those of the master™s degree. Students admitted  to graduate study for the Ph.D. degree must complete in their first year a  course of study that would qualify them for the master™s degree described  above. The student may elect to receive the master™s degree at the end of  their first year after completion of these courses.Special Regulations366 Research AdviserStudents wishing to pursue studies leading to the Ph.D. must select and  be accepted by a research adviser preferably by the end of their third  quarter but no later than the end of their first year of study and prior to tak-ing the qualifying examination described below.  Qualifying ExaminationAfter the first year of graduate study, the student must pass a qualifying  examination. The objective of the qualifying examination is to determine if the student is properly prepared and qualified to pursue problems  typical of Ph.D.-level research by demonstrating fundamental under -standing of the first year courses in the topic area of the exam. The  exam also evaluates effective oral communication of technical material  as a skill that is required for professional development. The exam will cover the following subjects: Aeronautics track Two areas chosen from:  Fluid mechanics  Solid/structural mechanics Autonomy and controlMathematicsSpace Engineering trackOne area chosen from: Fluid mechanics  Solid/structural mechanicsAutonomy and control MathematicsThe material covered in these examinations is at the same general  level and breadth as covered in the corresponding first-year courses.  The examinations are typically offered during one week in the first  half of the fall term, in the second year of graduate residence at the  Institute. A student is examined orally on all topics. In the event of an unsatisfactory performance, the examining faculty members may permit a repeat examination in the appropriate topics. The repeat examination  must be scheduled prior to finals week of the winter term and must be completed before the end of the spring term of the same year. Graduate Teaching Assignment Duties GALCIT provides opportunities to students to improve their teaching and  communication skills that are valuable in many contexts. Ph.D. students  are required to perform a minimum of 18 term hours of Graduate Teaching  Assistant (GTA) duties within the aerospace Department during their terms  of residence. GTA duties will be assigned after the first year in residence  and will be based on courses a student has completed.Candidacy367To be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. in aerospace, the  applicant must have satisfactorily completed at least 135 units of graduate  work equivalent to the above Master of Science program;   pass, with a grade of C or better, 27 units of graduate-level  mathematics courses beyond ACM 95/100, and ACM/IDS 104; complete (with a grade of C or better, or Pass) at least 45 units  of aerospace courses numbered Ae 200 or higher, or Ae/ME  118, Ae/ME 120, EE/Ae 157, Ae 159, Ae/Ge/ME 160 and Ae/CE  165ab, excluding research and seminars;  and complete three units of the advanced seminar Ae 208.  A proposed program conforming to the above regulations must be  approved by the student™s adviser and the option representative prior  to add day of the first term of work toward the degree. In addition to fulfilling these course requirements, the applicant  must pass a candidacy examination in the third year of residence at  the Institute. This exam should be administered by the start of the  second quarter of the third year of residency. This examination aims  at determining whether the student is successful in integrating formal course work into a mature understanding of fundamental engineering  concepts, and at demonstrating his or her professional competence  in applying these concepts to the problems being addressed in the  course of their Ph.D. research. MinorNo minor is required for the Ph.D. degree. Students are, however,  encouraged to take advanced courses appropriate to their particular  interests or pursue a minor in consultation with their adviser.  Foreign Languages  The student is encouraged to discuss with his or her adviser the desir -ability of studying foreign languages, but there is no formal foreign lan -guage requirement for the Ph.D.  Thesis and Final ExaminationPrior to graduation, each candidate is required to give a seminar pre -senting the results of his or her thesis research. For final examination  and thesis completion, see also the general degree requirements and  the section on Examinations, Committees, and Student Responsibilities regarding aerospace starting on page 363. A description of the Institute  requirements for conferral of a Ph.D. are given on page 347. Subject Minor A student majoring in a field other than aerospace may, with the  approval of the option representative, elect aerospace as a subject  minor. A minimum of 54 units in subjects acceptable to the aerospace  faculty is required. Problem and Grievance Resolution within aerospace  Special Regulations368Students may pursue several avenues for redress concerning per -sonal and academic problems that may arise during their residency,  as outlined by the Student Problem Resolution Process described  earlier in the catalog. Should a student not wish to discuss the rel -evant issues with their adviser, the option representative and/or the  director are always available to meet with the student. In addition,  two other resources are available, one at the student and one at  the faculty level. A student representative is elected annually by the  aerospace graduate students at or after the Information Session,  which is part of Ae 150. In the event that the student representative  has completed his or her Ph.D. studies before the election date and  left the Institute, the student organizer for Ae 150 may be his or her  replacement. A faculty member chosen by the aerospace faculty to  provide support for the students is available for student contact. The  names of the current student and faculty support persons are avail -able in the aerospace office. Educational Exchange Program with École Polytechnique  An educational exchange program is offered by the aerospace  option with École Polytechnique (EP). In this exchange program,  students selected for participation from Caltech will enroll for one  year at EP. Correspondingly, students selected for the program from  EP will enroll for one year at Caltech. To be eligible to participate,  aerospace students must have completed one full year of study (for  Caltech students this is equivalent to the requirements for the M.S.  degree) and agree that they will spend one full year at EP. First year  (G1) graduate students enrolled in Caltech™s doctoral aerospace  program will be apprised of the opportunity to participate in an edu -cational exchange program at the master™s level at EP. A maximum  of two student(s) will be selected by the aerospace faculty from the  pool of students who express interest in this program. Caltech stu -dents will follow their first (master™s) year at Caltech, and their sec -ond year in the second-year master™s (M2) program at EP. Caltech  students must fulfill the requirements of their first-year program and  receive their Caltech M.S. diploma prior to proceeding to EP.  Caltech students must register at Caltech during the year spent  at École Polytechnique and enroll in the special topics course Ae  240 Œ Educational exchange at École Polytechnique. This ensures  that they maintain their standing as enrolled graduate students at  Caltech. It is implied that classes taken at one institution cannot  duplicate classes already taken at the other institution. The expec -tation is that Caltech students will return to Caltech after completing  the EP program and continue with their doctoral studies at Caltech.  Caltech students should be prepared to take the qualifying exams in  the fall term when they return from EP. Caltech students participat -ing in the Caltech/EP educational exchange program will be consid -ered to be on detached duty from Caltech while at EP. A detached  duty agreement will be executed for each student that spells out the  terms and requirements for the detached duty. 369APPLIED AND COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS  (ACM)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Caltech™s Computing & Mathematical Sciences department offers an  interdisciplinary program of graduate study in applied and computational  mathematics leading to the Ph.D. degree. This program is designed to give  students a thorough training in fundamental computational and applied  mathematics and to develop their research ability in a specific application  field. The fields of application include a wide range of areas such as fluid  mechanics, materials science, and mathematical biology, engineering  applications, image processing, and mathematical finance. The training  essential for future careers in applied mathematics in academia, national  laboratories, or in industry is provided by completion of the requirements  for a Ph.D. degree in applied and computational mathematics.  The research areas and interests of the applied and computational  mathematics faculty cover a broad spectrum, including nonlinear dynam -ics, computational biology, numerical analysis and scientific computing,  computational and theoretical fluid mechanics, theoretical materials sci -ence, multiscale computations and homogenization theory, computational  methods for electromagnetics and acoustics, statistics, signal and image  processing, probability theory and stochastic analysis, and dynamical  systems and geometric mechanics. As reflected by the faculty research  activities, there is a strong emphasis on computational methods for solving  challenging problems arising from engineering and scientific applications.  Reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of the program, several different  groups, in addition to the applied and computational mathematics faculty,  contribute to the teaching and supervision of research. Students in applied  and computational mathematics are expected to combine their basic  mathematical studies with deep involvement in some field of application.  Basic general courses are listed specifically under applied and computa -tional mathematics, and these are to be supplemented, according to the  student™s interest, from the whole range of Institute courses in specific  areas of physics, biology, engineering, etc.  A regular colloquium provides the opportunity for visitors, faculty, and  students to discuss current research.  AdmissionEach new graduate student admitted to work for the Ph.D. in applied and  computational mathematics is given an informal interview on Thursday  or Friday of the week preceding the beginning of instruction for the fall  term. The purpose of this interview is to ascertain the preparation of the  student and assist them in mapping out a course of study. The work of  the student during the first year will usually include some independent  reading and/or research. Course Requirements.All ACM students are required to take a total of 18 nine-unit courses at  the graduate level (or the equivalent of 162 units) during their graduate study at Caltech. Among these 18 courses, the following core courses,  Special Regulations370typically taken during the student™s first year of study, are required:  ACM/IDS 101 ab, ACM 105, CMS/ACM/IDS 107, Ma 108 abc ACM/EE 106 ab, CMS 117, and an application elective course. The application elective course in the first year is selected, with the recommendation of  the student™s adviser, from among a wide range of courses offered by  an outside option within the Institute. In addition, CMS 290 is required  for all first year ACM graduate students during each term (fall/winter/spring). In the second and third years, students are expected to take  graduate-level courses appropriate to their chosen research area. The  remaining courses towards the 162 unit requirement would normally  include graduate-level ACM or CMS courses such as CMS/ACM/EE 122, ACM 201, 210, ACM/IDS 216, ACM/IDS 217, etc., as deemed appropriate to the student™s research program, and which must be  selected in consultation with the student™s research adviser.  Students who have already taken some of the required courses may  use them to satisfy the course requirements, even though the units may  not be used to satisfy the total unit requirement for the Ph.D. degree. ACM Master™s Degree Students are not admitted to work toward the master™s degree. The  master™s degree may be awarded to an ACM student only in excep -tional circumstances. Of the 135 units of graduate work required by  Institute regulations, at least 81 units of advanced graduate work  should be in applied mathematics.ACM Degree of Doctor of Philosophy The Preliminary Examination.Toward the end of the first year, all incoming students must take a  preliminary examination administered by the faculty. Its purpose is to  ensure a solid and broad knowledge in applied and computational  mathematics, and in the event of a deficiency, to direct the students to  necessary course and reading. The Candidacy ExaminationTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in applied and  computational mathematics, all students must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements and passing the preliminary exam -ination, pass a candidacy examination administered by a committee  that consists of at least four faculty, is approved by the option repre -sentative, and is chaired by the student™s research adviser. The exam -ination will ascertain the student™s breadth and depth of preparation for  research in the chosen area. The examination must be taken within the  first three years of residence. Advising and Thesis SupervisionUpon passing the preliminary examination, the student is required to  choose a thesis supervisor who assumes the major responsibility in  supervising the Ph.D. thesis. At the same time, an advising committee  consisting of three faculty members is formed to help oversee the advis -ing process. This committee should be formed no later than the third  371year of graduate study. The student™s supervisor is part of this commit -tee, but does not chair the committee. The student is encouraged to  meet with the committee members informally for advice or suggestions.  Joint supervision between two faculty members is also possible, as is  seeking a thesis adviser outside the core applied and computational  mathematics option, although in this case it is mandatory that an applied  mathematics faculty member be nominated as a co-adviser.  Should a disagreement of any kind occur between the student and  his or her supervisor as regards the timely completion of the thesis, the  student is encouraged to direct his or her concerns to the committee  chair. If this is not workable, the student should feel free to consult  with the option representative, the executive officer, or an applied and  computational mathematics faculty member of the student™s choice. If  the student™s concerns cannot be resolved through consultation with  these individuals, the student is encouraged to pursue resolution of his  or her concerns through other channels as outlined in Student Problem  Resolution Process on page 42.  Final ExaminationThe final oral examination is held within four weeks after the submis-sion of the thesis. The examination covers the thesis and related areas.  ACM Subject MinorThe group of courses must differ markedly from the major subject of study, and must include 54 units of advanced courses in applied math -ematics and must not be simultaneously used for fulfilling a requirement  of the second option. The qualifying courses exclude ACM95/100,  although some flexibility is allowed depending upon the option of origin.  The student must pass an oral examination whose subject is directly related to the material covered in the qualifying courses. This oral exam -ination will be waived if the student has received a grade of A in every course. APPLIED MECHANICS (AM)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program Applied mechanics (AM) research and study are offered through the  Department of Mechanical and Civil Engineering (MCE). The degrees  of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) and Master of Science (M.S.) are  offered. In general, students who intend to work full-time toward the  Ph.D. degree as a final degree objective are admitted to the Applied  Mechanics Graduate Program. The M.S. degree is typically only award -ed to students who pursue the Ph.D. degree in applied mechanics  at Caltech and who do not already have an M.S. degree in applied  mechanics.The aim of the graduate program in applied mechanics at Caltech is to  prepare students for research and professional practice in an era of rapidly  advancing interdisciplinary technology. The program combines individual  depth of experience and competence in a particular chosen major spe-Special Regulations372cialty, with a strong background in the basic and engineering sciences. It  strives to develop professional independence, creativity, leadership, and  the capacity for continuing professional and intellectual growth. AM Preparation for the Graduate Program Entering graduate students are expected to have a thorough back -ground in undergraduate mathematics, physics, and engineering. While  a strong undergraduate program in applied mechanics should provide  a suitable preparation, students who have not specialized in applied  mechanics as undergraduates may also be admitted for graduate  study. For example, an outstanding four-year undergraduate program in  mathematics and sciences may provide a suitable background as well.  The qualifications of each applicant will be considered individually, and,  after being enrolled, the student will arrange his or her program in con -sultation with a member of the faculty. AM Master™s Degree  The degree of Master of Science in applied mechanics is only award -ed to students who do not already have an M.S. degree in applied  mechanics. The degree will be awarded upon request by students  who have fulfilled the requirements. Only in exceptional cases is there  admission to the M.S. program as the final degree objective. A minimum of 138 units of courses numbered 100 or above, which  meet the required master™s program listed below, must be passed with  a grade of at least C for completion of the master™s degree in applied  mechanics. All units must be taken for grades, except for courses offered only on a pass/fail basis. The M.S. degree in applied mechanics  is typically completed within the first two years of residency at Caltech. Each student™s program must be approved by the adviser and option  representative in mechanical and civil engineering before registering for  the course.Required Master™s Program  a)  Graduate applied mechanics core (45 units). These units   should provide a solid base for the student™s engineering    interest. The courses should be selected from the Core     AM subjects listed under the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy    Description and Requirements section.  b)  Mathematics, engineering, and research electives, except    seminar courses (63 units). Research up to a maximum    of 27 units. c)  Free electives (27 units). Any course with a number of 100    or greater, may be selected, except that research units and    seminar courses can not be included. d)  Graduate Engineering Seminar, AM/CE/ME 150 abc   (3 units).AM Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  The Ph.D. degree in applied mechanics is focused on research. Study and  research programs for the Ph.D. degree are individually planned to fit the  373interests and background of the student. A comprehensive research proj -ect resulting in an original contribution to the field, which is documented  by a thesis, is required. Institute requirements for the Ph.D. degree are  described in the section on degree requirements. A minimum of three  academic years in residence as a graduate student are required by the  Institute, and two or more additional years are usually needed for prepara -tion of the thesis.Advising and Thesis SupervisionAn interim adviser is appointed for each student upon admission to a graduate degree in applied mechanics. The interim adviser will serve  as the primary mentor until the student finds a research adviser. It  is the responsibility of the student to find an academic and research  adviser within three terms of graduate residence at Caltech. In consul -tation with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  Committee within four terms of graduate residence at Caltech. This  committee shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech pro -fessorial faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in mechan -ical and civil engineering. The committee shall meet as requested by  the student. Further, the committee shall meet annually to review prog -ress and to approve the registration of the student beyond the fifth year  of graduate residence at Caltech. The adviser and the Thesis Advisory Committee provide the majority  of mentoring to the student. In addition, the Option Representative and  other members of the faculty are always available to provide advice  and mentoring on any aspect of research, progress toward the Ph.D.,  future careers, and other aspects of life in graduate school and as a  professional scientist. Admission to CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in applied  mechanics, the student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements, do the following:  as his or her academic and research adviser before the end of  the third term of graduate residence at Caltech. In consultation  with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  Committee before the end of the fourth term. This committee  shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech professori -al faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in mechan -ical and civil engineering. -dacy examination before the end of the eighth term of graduate  academic residence at Caltech. If the student has chosen a  subject minor, an examination on the subject of that program  may be included at the request of the discipline offering the  subject minor.  above, that fulfill the required Ph.D. program listed below. All  units must be taken for grades and passed with a grade of at  least a C, except for courses offered only on a pass/fail basis.  Special Regulations374The course work towards the Ph.D. degree in applied mechan -ics is typically completed within the first three years of residen -cy at Caltech.The faculty will evaluate the student™s research progress, class  performance, adviser™s input, and oral candidacy exam results to  determine whether a student will be admitted to or be able to maintain candidacy for the Ph.D. degree. Required Ph.D. Programa)  Applied Mechanics Core Subject  (45 units): Course work in core  subjects selected from the list below; pass with a grade of at  least C: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101abc, Ae/AM/CE/ME 102abc, AM/CE 151, Ae/Ge/ME 160ab, ME/CE 163, Ae/CE 165ab, ME/CE/Ge 174, CE 181ab, Ae/AM/MS/ME 213, Ae/AM/CE/ME 214, Ae 220, Ae/CE 221, Ae/AM/ME 223, AM/CE/ME 252, ME/Ge/Ae 266ab. The student may petition the mechanical and civil engineering  option representative to accept alternate subjects or areas. These  changes should retain core applied mechanics knowledge, should not  be a sub-specialty of one of the listed areas, and should represent  sufficient breadth. The approval is not automatic; such petitions are  submitted rarely and many have been denied in the past. The petition  must be submitted to the option representative and approved before  the student registers for the course. b)  Electives or Minor (63 units): Additional engineering or science  courses with course number 101 or above, except seminar  or research courses. Pass with a grade of at least C, courses  that are approved by the Thesis Advisory Committee. These  courses are intended to provide further depth and incorporate  breadth. These units can be used to satisfy a minor require -ment in another option. c)  Advanced mathematics or applied mathematics (27 units): Pass  with a grade of at least C, chosen in consultation with adviser  from the following list: ACM 101 or higher, CDS 232, Ma 108 or  higher, Ph 129. The requirement in mathematics is in addition  to the requirements above.  d)  Graduate engineering seminar (6 units): Six terms of AM/CE/ME  150 abc, within 12 terms or, 3 years, in residence at Caltech. e)  Research  (54 units): Successfully complete at least 54 units of  research and demonstrate satisfactory research progress. Registration Beyond the Sixth Year of Graduate Residence The annual approval of the Ph.D. Thesis Advisory Committee is nec -essary for registration beyond the twenty-fourth academic term of  graduate residence at Caltech.  Thesis and Final ExaminationThe thesis examination will be given after the thesis has been formally  completed. This examination will be a defense of the doctoral thesis  375and a test of the candidate™s knowledge in the specialized field of  research. The format of the examination can be chosen from the fol -lowing two options, by the student, in consultation with their research  adviser: (i) a public seminar presented by the candidate, with an open  question period, followed by a private examination by the Examining  Committee or (ii) a private presentation to the Examining Committee  followed by the examination, with a public seminar on another date.  The Examining Committee shall consist of a minimum of four voting  members, three of whom must be Caltech faculty; two members must  be from MCE. The Thesis Defense Committee shall be chaired by a  committee member who is an MCE Caltech professorial faculty mem -ber and not the student™s adviser. AM Subject MinorA student majoring in another branch of engineering or another division of the Institute may, with the approval of the faculty in the Department  of Mechanical and Civil Engineering and the faculty in his or her major field, elect applied mechanics as a subject minor. The program  of courses must differ markedly from the major subject of study or  research, and must consist of at least 54 units of advanced courses  (101 or above) approved by the faculty in mechanical and civil engi -neering.APPLIED PHYSICS (APh)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program Applied physics is a broad field of study that lies at the intersection of  physics and many other fields of science and engineering. The applied physics option at Caltech is accordingly a highly multidisciplinary pro -gram that is designed to train students in a broad spectrum of physics  and engineering fields at an advanced level. Moreover, it is our goal to  cultivate abilities in our graduates to apply this knowledge throughout  their lives so as to make technological and scientific breakthroughs at  the edge of current knowledge.  APh Preparation for the Graduate Program Students admitted for graduate study can enter from a broad range of  disciplines, but are expected to have a rigorous background in under -graduate mathematics, physics, and engineering. An outstanding four- year undergraduate program in mathematics and sciences may provide  a suitable background as well. The qualifications of each applicant will  be considered individually. After enrollment, the student will arrange a  course of study and research in consultation with members of the fac -ulty and the applied physics option representative. APh Description of the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) To receive the doctoral degree in applied physics students must demon -strate the ability to formulate and execute an original program of scientific  study. As part of this, a doctoral candidate is expected to develop a deep  Special Regulations376understanding in a chosen field of specialization; to develop tools with  which to assess problems outside one™s field of specialization; to develop  rigor and strength in the physical sciences for self-education beyond for -mal training; and to develop skills to become a productive member of the  community of scholars. All students wishing to enter the program must  complete a series of preparatory courses, followed by an oral candidacy  exam in which the student describes their proposed topic of research and  is examined on their knowledge of course subject matter. Upon passing  the candidacy examination, students work towards completion of a thesis  in consultation with their research adviser. The doctoral degree is awarded  upon approval of a written thesis by a faculty committee, and successful  defense of the thesis in a final oral examination. There is no separate mas -ter™s program in applied physics. However, with the approval of the stu -dent™s adviser and the applied physics option representative, the degree of  Master of Science in Applied Physics may be awarded after the fulfillment  of the course requirements described below. APh Advising and Thesis SupervisionAn interim adviser is appointed for each student upon admission to the  graduate program in applied physics. Typically, this person is the applied  physics option representative. In consultation with the interim adviser the  student will determine a course schedule and identify a faculty research  adviser. This most often occurs within the first six months of graduate  residence. The faculty adviser is the student™s primary mentor and the  student will work in the adviser™s research group to formulate and execute  a plan of study leading to the thesis. In consultation with their research  adviser, the student will also form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory Committee. This  four-member committee should include the student™s adviser and at least  three members of the Caltech professorial faculty from either the applied  physics or physics options. The Thesis Advisory Committee will conduct  the qualifying examination and also approve the thesis and conduct the  thesis defense. The membership of this committee may change between  the time of the qualifying exam and the final defense.APh Requirements for Candidacy to the Ph.D. Degree To be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in applied phys -ics, a student must demonstrate mastery in the following five areas of pure  and applied physics:     State PhysicsA. Graduate Coursework toward CandidacyIn partial fulfillment of the ﬁmasteryﬂ requirement a student must suc -cessfully complete a minimum of 108 units of courses numbered 101 or  above from the course schedule. In addition, 4 units of APh 110ab must  also be completed. All courses must be passed with a grade of at least  377a C, except for courses offered only on a pass/fail basis. Students must  also complete the degree progress report online upon completion of their  courses.  Note: Any given class can only be used for one requirement category. Total Units 1. Classical Mechanics and Electromagnetism 18 Ph 106 ab or Ph 106 bc Or, with option representative approval, units may be  used from: Ph 101, APh 115/116, APh 156 abc, or Ph  136abc2. Quantum Mechanics18Ph 125 ab or Ph 125 bc or Ch 125 ab or Ch 125 bcOr, with option representative approval, units may be  used from: Ph 137 abc, Ph 205 abc, or Ph 219 abc 3. Mathematical Methods18-24ACM/IDS 101 ab or Ph 129ab or Ph 129 bc Or, with option representative approval, units from  other Mathematics or Applied Mathematics courses  4. Statistical Physics and Thermodynamics18APh 105 ab or APh 105 bc or Ph 127 ab Or, with option representative approval, units may be  used from: Ae/ME118, Ae/ME218, Ch/ChE164,  Ch/ChE165, Ph 127 c, Ph 135, or Ph 223 ab5. Elective Classes36Select from: Ae 101 abc, APh 109, APh 114 abc,  APh 115/116, APh 118 abc, APh 122, Aph 123, APh  130/131/132, APh 137 ab, APh 138 ab, APh 156 abc,  APh 161, APh 183, APh/EE 190 abc, APh 223 ab, Aph  256, Ph 106 c, Ph 125 c, Ph 127 c, APh 149 and APh  180Or other courses with approval from option  representative. Special Regulations378First year students are also required to take APh 110 ab, a two-term  seminar course in which faculty review their research areas and ongo -ing research work in their group.  Total Units Faculty Presentation Seminar for   1st Year Graduate Students 4APh 110 a (2 units)APh 110 b (2 units)In addition to work in the classroom, students must complete a mini -mum of 27 units of laboratory or reading research through APh 200.  Total Units Applied Physics Research APh 20027Students entering the program with advanced preparation may  choose either to substitute more advanced courses in the topical areas  shown or demonstrate competency by successfully passing both the midterm and final examinations. In such cases, students may petition the Applied Physics option representative to accept alternate subjects  or areas. These changes should retain core applied physics knowledge,  and maintain sufficient breadth. All such petitions must be submitted to  the option representative and approved before the student registers for  the course.Coursework towards the Ph.D. degree in Applied Physics is normally  completed within the first two years of graduate residency.  B. Candidacy ExaminationTo fulfill the requirements for candidacy all students must pass an oral  examination after completing their coursework. This examination must be taken before the beginning of the student™s third year in residence.  Students will be expected to deliver a half-hour oral presentation giving  a prospectus on their proposed thesis research. Following questions  on the research prospectus, a more open-ended set of questions will  be posed to the student by the committee members to test general proficiency in the five areas of pure and applied physics listed above.  Students who fail the oral examination on their first attempt will be given additional guidelines for further study and an opportunity to retake the examination a second and final time if the committee so  recommends. Students who fail the oral examination a second time  cannot continue with doctoral studies leading to the Ph.D. Upon rec -ommendation of the examining committee, however, a student may  be granted a master™s degree. Annual approval of the applied physics  option representative is necessary for registration beyond the third year  of graduate residence if the student has not completed the candidacy  examination.379Students who fulfill the requirements above will be recommended for  candidacy to the doctoral program and a master™s degree (if applicable)  in applied physics.APh Ph.D. Thesis Requirements The candidate is to provide a draft copy of the completed thesis to the  members of the examining committee (typically the same as the thesis  committee) at least two weeks before the final oral examination. The date  of the examination and the composition of the examining committee will  not be approved by the dean of graduate studies until the thesis is sub -mitted in completed form, i.e., ready for review by the dean, the members  of the thesis committee, and the Graduate Office proofreader. Registration  is required for the term in which the thesis defense is taken, but is not  normally allowed beyond the last date of the term. For more information,  please see the section entitled ﬁInformation for Graduate Studentsﬂ in the  Caltech Catalog.APh Ph.D. Final ExaminationThe candidate shall undergo a final broad oral examination (thesis  defense) in the field, to include the subspecialty represented by the  thesis and the significance of its findings to the field. This oral exam-ination will be administered at least two weeks after the doctoral thesis  has been presented in final form so that the examining committee has  sufficient time to review its content. This examination must be taken at  least three weeks prior to the date on which the degree will be officially  conferred. APh Registration Beyond the Sixth Year of Graduate Residence The annual approval of the student™s Thesis Advisory Committee is  necessary for registration beyond the twenty-fourth academic term of  graduate residence at Caltech. APh Subject MinorGraduate students majoring in other fields may elect a minor in applied physics. In addition to general Institute requirements, the student must  complete, with a grade of C or higher, 81 units of courses in applied  physics above the 100 level, excluding APh 200. The minor is also sub-ject to the following conditions: -fillment of this requirement.   the option representative in applied physics, who will review and  approve the proposed course of study.   courses spanning different subfields of applied physics.  Special Regulations380ASTROPHYSICS (Ay)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program The primary aim of the graduate astrophysics program at Caltech is to  prepare students for creative and productive careers in astrophysical  research and a variety of other challenging vocations. The astrophys -ics program emphasizes independent research by graduate students,  who are free to pursue study in virtually any area of astrophysics. The  opportunity exists to take advantage of the many observational facili-ties owned and operated by Caltech (see page 134).Ay Admission Incoming students should have a strong background in physics, and  although a good preparation in astronomy is helpful, this is not required for  admission to the graduate program. The GRE tests (general and advanced  subject) are not required and scores will not be considered for admission. Ay Master™s Degree While the option does not offer a master™s degree program in itself,  students who fulfill the general Institute requirements for such a degree,  and the specific option requirements (see below), can receive a mas -ter™s degree, either en route to a final Ph.D. degree if admitted to candi -dacy, or as a terminal degree if the Ph.D. requirements are not met. The choice of astronomy and other science elective courses must  be approved by the option representative. At least 54 units of the 135  units must be selected from Ay 121Œ127, with at least 36 units earned  with a grade of B- or better. The courses Ph 106, Ph 125, and Ph 129  may be required of those students whose previous training in some of  these subjects proves to be insufficient. At least 27 units of advanced  courses in fields other than astronomy are required. Ay Degree of Doctor of Philosophy Astrophysics ProgramThe student™s proposed overall program of study must be approved by the  option representative during the first year. The following are required of all  students for candidacy: Ay 121, Ay 123, Ay 124, Ay 125, Ay 126, and Ay  127. The student should take these courses in the first year. Students must  also take at least one term of Ay 122 unless exempted. Also required are  research and reading projects. Credit for this work will be given under Ay  142 and Ay 143. The above courses must be passed with a grade of BŒ or  better. Electives Program  The first two years of graduate study should include at least four courses  (36 units) of additional electives relevant to astrophysics, with six courses  (54 units) required of theory students. The electives requirement may be  reduced for students who need to take Ph 106, Ph 125 or Ph 129 in order  to make up for gaps in preparation at the undergraduate level.  Suggested elective courses include, but are not limited to: Ph 101,  Ph 105, Ph/Aph 118 a, Ph 127 b, Ph 135, Ph 136ab, Ph 236, Ph 237. 381For theory students, Ph 136 a and Ph 136 b are required, and in addi -tion to Ph, electives in applied mathematics should be considered.  For students in observation and experiment, Ph 136 a and Ph 136 b are strongly recommended, and in any case at least one of the four  advanced course electives must be in Ph, while the complement may be from other options such as electrical engineering, applied mechan -ics, computer science, planetary science (geophysics or geochemistry). Seminar courses and research practicum courses do not count as sat -isfying the requirement for pedagogical elective coursework; however,  students are encouraged to take these types of courses during second  year. No more than 18 of the elective units may be taken P/F; all oth -ers must be passed with a grade of C or better. In the third year and  above, students are welcome to enroll in additional advanced astrono -my and physics courses.Other RequirementsAn ability to explain concepts and to verbally present one™s work is  vital to a successful career in research and/or teaching. To this end,  all graduate students in astrophysics are required to serve as teaching  assistants during their second year, and to make oral presentations as  part of the course Ay 141, 3 terms of which must be taken every year  by all students beginning in their second year. Graduate students for whom English is a second language may be required to demonstrate fluency in oral and written English at the time  of their candidacy exam. The examining committee will arrange for an evaluation if this is deemed necessary. Admission to CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in astrophys -ics, a student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute require -ments: complete satisfactorily 36 units of research (Ay 142) or  reading (Ay 143);   pass satisfactorily, or by special examination, the required  astrophysics courses (see above);  pass a general oral examination (see below);  pass a thesis-related examination (see below);   complete the physics course requirement (see above);   satisfy a teaching requirement (generally two terms as a GTA);  fulfill the language requirement if applicable (see above);  and be accepted for thesis research by a member of the faculty. In fall of their second year, all students are required to take a general  oral qualifying examination. Students will be examined on the sub-stance and status of, as well as their performance on, a research proj -ect, which should be started not later than the summer following the first year. They will further be examined on their broad understanding  of current topics in, and fundamentals of, astrophysics. Both of these  aspects of the examination are intended to evaluate the candidate™s  aptitude for a research career in astrophysics. In addition, at the discre -tion of the executive officer, students who have not done well in one, or  Special Regulations382at most two, areas covered in the Ay 12x course series during their first  year will be retested in these areas during the examination. Students  must pass all of the aspects of this examination, as judged by the fac-ulty committee conducting it, in order to continue in the Ph.D. program. Students who do not meet the minimum grade requirements in the  Ay 121Œ127 series, or who do not pass the general candidacy examina -tion described above, will not be able to continue in the Ph.D. program.  They may receive a terminal master™s degree, provided that they fulfill  the requirements for it (see above). Advising and Thesis SupervisionBy the summer of their first year, students should be spending most of  their time on research. During their first two years, students are free to  work with any faculty they wish, on one or more projects. However, by  the summer of their second year at the latest, they should have defined a thesis project and been accepted by a faculty research adviser for  that project (in cases where the thesis involves multiple projects, a sec -ond faculty adviser may supervise part of the research, but one must  be selected as primary adviser). An oral candidacy exam dealing with the student™s proposed thesis research should be completed before the  end of the third year. The date and time of the exam are the responsi -bility of the student to arrange. The candidacy committee is approved  by the option representative in consultation with the student™s adviser  and a list of suggested members provided by the student. This com -mittee becomes the student™s Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC) and  will stand until the final oral thesis defense, and be charged with ensur -ing that satisfactory progress toward the Ph.D. is being made. If the candidate does not pass the oral candidacy exam, then the candidacy committee may at its discretion offer the candidate a second  oral examination. This examination must be successfully completed by the end of the third term of the third year.  After the oral candidacy exam, the adviser and the student togeth-er have primary responsibility for the student™s progress and career  development. To ensure that these remain on course, both student and  adviser must submit annual progress reports to the executive officer (or  in the case of a conflict of interest, to the astrophysics option represen -tative or the division chair), and meet (ﬁcheck-inﬂ) with the committee members at least once per year. If at any stage the student, the adviser,  or the executive officer feels that there are serious problems devel -oping, they may consult in confidence with the astrophysics option  representative, the executive officer, or the division chair. They may also  request a meeting of the committee or seek the advice or help of other  faculty members. Students may also consult with the PMA director of  student programming or seek confidential advice and help from the  Student Wellness Services.   Final Examination (Ph.D. Oral Thesis Defense)A final draft of the thesis must be submitted to the registrar at least six  weeks before the commencement at which the degree is to be con -ferred. At least two weeks after submission of the thesis, the student  will be examined orally on the scope of the thesis and its relation to  current research in astrophysics. The examination will be conducted  383by a committee selected in the same way as thecandidacy committee and is nominally the thesis advisory committee. The oral thesis defense should occur before the end of the fifth year.  Typical Timeline Year 1: Ay 121, Ay 123Œ127; at least two advanced physics courses;  reading and independent study. Begin research. Year 2: Early fallŠgeneral oral qualifying examination. Fulfill teaching  requirement. Complete 36 units of physics (54 for theorists);  a term of Ay 122 if applicable; optional advanced astronomy  courses. Ay 141. Research projects; select thesis and adviser. Year 3: Complete oral candidacy exam on proposed thesis before  end of second term. Annual report from student and adviser.  Ay 141. Optional Advanced CoursesYear 4: Annual report from  student and adviser. Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC) check-in.  Ay 141. Year 5: Annual report from student and adviser. Thesis Advisory  Committee (TAC) check-in. Ay 141. Complete Ph.D. thesis before  the end of year 5. Final oral thesis defense.Ay Subject Minor  The program for a subject minor in astrophysics must be approved by  the option representative in both options before admission to candida -cy in the home option. In addition to general Institute requirements, the  student pursuing a graduate subject minor in astronomy must complete  with a grade of C or better, 45 units in advanced courses in astronomy. BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS (BMB) Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program An integrated approach to graduate study in biochemistry and molec -ular biophysics has been organized primarily by the Divisions of  Biology and Biological Engineering (BBE) and Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (CCE). The curriculum is designed to provide a broad  background in biochemistry and biophysics of macromolecules and  molecular assemblies, in addition to an appropriate depth of knowledge  in the field selected for the Ph.D. thesis research. BMB AdmissionThe option in Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics is open to stu -dents with undergraduate degrees in biochemistry, biology, chemistry,  biophysics, physics, engineering, and related areas. Applicants whose  native language is not English may submit results of the TOEFL exam  and, after admission, are required to satisfy the English language  requirements of the Institute.BMB Master™s Degree Students are not admitted to work toward the M.S. degree. An M.S.  degree may be awarded only in special circumstances, provided Special Regulations384Institute requirements are met, and is typically conferred as a terminal  degree after the end of the second year of residence.BMB Degree of Doctor of Philosophy The option eepresentative will counsel and oversee the student™s prog -ress upon admission to the graduate program. During the first year of  graduate study, students are required to participate in the BMB 202  seminar course and BMB 174. Additionally, as noted below, the option  offers a series of courses that will expose the student to contemporary  issues in biochemistry and molecular biophysics, and to the tools and methods that are essential for research in this area. Research advis -ers are normally selected at the end of spring quarter of the first year.  Students are required to take five additional advanced courses of nine  or more units that are appropriate for their particular research interests  (as determined by the option representative). Teaching All students are to serve as teaching assistants for two quarters with  the first in the first year of residence and the second by the end of the  fourth year. In addition to serving an educational purpose, funds for the  TA assignments are a component of the stipend. Outside factors, such  as previous TA positions prior to starting the Ph.D. program, may be  considered as satisfying the requirement upon approval by the option  representative. Laboratory RotationsIn consultation with the Option Representative and individual profes -sors, students will choose three laboratories to do one term research  projects during their first year of residence. These laboratory rotations  are designed to provide students with an introduction to different areas  of biochemistry and molecular biophysics along with identifying a lab for  thesis research. It is possible to waive the third rotation with permission  given by petitioning the Option Representative. Admission to CandidacyBy the end of the sixth term of residency, the student will take an oral  examination to assess mastery of the field of biochemistry and to evaluate  research progress. As part of this examination, each student will submit  a written research report summarizing the progress in their research, and  an original research proposal in a field outside the student™s chosen field  of research. A candidacy examination committee of four to five faculty  (including the advisor) will be assembled by the student in consultation  with their advisor and approved by the option representative. The chair of  the committee should be identified at this time and should be a member  of the BMB option who is not the thesis advisor. In addition to satisfac -tory completion of the candidacy exam, admission to candidacy requires  satisfactory completion of BMB 174 and five additional advanced courses  of nine or more units (numbered 100 or above). Upon admission to can -didacy, the faculty committee will become the thesis advisory committee.  Students are required to meet annually with their thesis advisory commit -tee to evaluate research progress. This committee will also serve as the  385Ph.D. thesis examination committee. A fifth member may be added at this  time. After candidacy, a student will meet annually with the thesis commit -tee to assess progress. Thesis and Final ExaminationThesis research will be carried out under the direction of one or more fac -ulty members in the BMB option. The thesis defense will consist of a the-sis seminar, followed by an examination by the Ph.D. thesis committee. BIOENGINEERING (BE)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program Bioengineering research at Caltech focuses on the application of engi -neering principles to the design, analysis, construction, and manipula-tion of biological systems, and on the discovery and application of new engineering principles inspired by the properties of biological systems.  Areas of research emphasis include: biodevices, bioimaging, bioin -spired design, biomechanics, biomedical engineering, cell and tissue  engineering, molecular programming, synthetic biology, and systems  biology. The goal of the doctoral program is to prepare students to  become leading scientists and engineers in academia and industry. The  graduate program aims to educate students to be highly competent  in their chosen area of research, but also provide them with a broad  knowledge foundation in bioengineering. By graduation, students are  expected to have a working knowledge of bioengineering in general and an in-depth knowledge of their chosen area, have independently  planned and conducted research experiments in their chosen area, and  successfully defended their thesis work in an open forum.BE Master™s Degree Students are not admitted to work toward the M.S. degree. In special  circumstances, the M.S. degree may be awarded, provided Institute  requirements are met. BE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy In addition to satisfying the general Institute requirements, candidates  for a Ph.D. in bioengineering at Caltech must satisfy the following requirements:  Course Requirements Coursework requirements provide maximum flexibility in building on  undergraduate training and complementing the research activities of  each student. To assist in the selection of a research area, to foster  interactions within the entering class, and to discuss ethical guidelines for scientific research, students participate in three required discussion  courses in their first year: current research topics in Caltech bioengi -neering labs (BE 267, first term); Reading the Bioengineering Literature  (BE 201, second term); Responsible Conduct of Research (Bi 252, first  term). Graduate students must take BE 201 again in their second year. Special Regulations386In addition to the required courses, students must take at least six  electives (one-quarter courses totaling at least 54 units; grade of B or higher in each course) selected in consultation with the student™s advis -er and the option representative. Two of these courses must be Bi/ CNS/NB 195 and BE/Bi 103 a, unless the option representative deems  the student™s past course work to have covered the topics of those  courses and waives the requirement. Waived courses do not count  toward the requirement of six electives. To maximize the opportunity  for research during the early stages of the graduate career, coursework  may be spread over the first and second years. Electives are listed  below. Other courses may count as electives at the discretion of the  option representative. Bioimaging and biomedical devices electives: AM/CE 151 ab, APh 109, APh/EE 130, APh/EE 132, BE/EE/MedE 189 ab, Bi/BE 177, Bi/BE 227, EE/APh 131, EE/BE/MedE 185, EE/MedE 187, Ph 106 abc, Ph/APh/EE/BE 118 abc.Biomechanics and bioinspired design electives:  Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc, Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc, Ae/BE 242, BE/Bi/MedE 106, BE 159, ChE 103 abc, ChE 151 ab, ChE/Ch 164, ChE 174, MedE/BE/Ae 243, Ph 127 abc. Synthetic biology, systems biology, molecular programming, and cell  and tissue engineering electives: BE 150, BE 153, BE 159, BE/APh 161, Bi 117, Bi 145 ab, ChE/BE 163, BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191ab, ChE 130.Biology electives: BE 150, Bi/Ch 110, Bi/Ch 111, Bi 114, Bi 115, Bi 117, Bi 118, Bi 122, Bi/BE 129, Bi 145 ab, BE 153, BE 159, BE/APh 161, Bi/CNS 150.Math electives: ACM 100 ab, ACM/EE/IDS 116, ACM/ESE 118, AM 125 abc, ChE 105, CDS 110, CDS 140.ResearchThe flexibility of the coursework requirements enables research to be  the primary activity from the very first term in residence. Students are  encouraged to do two or more research rotations during the first year  to sample research activities in multiple labs before selecting a Ph.D.  adviser. Rotations are arranged by contacting individual faculty. Adviser SelectionEach student must select a Ph.D. adviser by the end of the spring term of the first academic year. Advisers may be any Caltech faculty mem -ber working in an area related to bioengineering. First Year Conversation Before the end of the spring term of the first year in residence, each  student meets with a faculty committee for a discussion of first-year progress and second-year plans. The committee must be composed  of three faculty, plus the Ph.D. adviser(s), including a minimum of two  bioengineering faculty. The student will give a brief presentation on  research progress and future plans, as well as discuss fundamentals  related to the research area. 387Admission to CandidacyBy the end of the spring term of the second year in residence, each stu -dent must complete the coursework requirement, prepare a candidacy  report, and pass an oral candidacy exam. The report should be brief,  describing research progress to date and outlining plans for the remaining  doctoral research. The candidacy report should be submitted to the com -mittee members one week before the oral exam. The committee must be  composed of three faculty, plus the adviser(s), including a minimum of two  bioengineering faculty. The oral candidacy exam will include presentation  of research progress, presentation of a proposed outline for the thesis,  and questioning on fundamentals related to the research area. Students  that complete the coursework requirement, prepare a candidacy report,  and pass the oral candidacy exam will be recommended for candidacy.  Students that are not admitted to candidacy by the end of the second year  in residence will not be permitted to register in subsequent terms except  with special permission from the option representative. Thesis Advisory Committee MeetingsOnce a student has been admitted to candidacy, each doctoral student  will select a Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC). The committee must be  composed of three faculty, plus the adviser(s), including a minimum of  two bioengineering faculty. This committee should meet at least once  each year for the remainder of the student™s time at Caltech. Thesis ExaminationA final oral examination will be given after the thesis has been formally completed. The exam will consist of a public research presentation  followed by a private defense with an exam committee. The committee must be composed of three faculty, plus the adviser(s), including a min -imum of two Bioengineering faculty. The thesis examination will be a  defense of the doctoral thesis and a test of the candidate™s knowledge  in his or her specialized field of research.  BE Subject MinorA student may, with the approval of the bioengineering graduate option  representative, elect a subject minor in bioengineering. Such a program  shall consist of 45 units of upper division course work in bioengineering,  with each course passed with a grade of C or better. Courses used to  satisfy course requirements in the student™s major option may not be used  to satisfy the minor requirements. Approval of each program must be  obtained from the bioengineering graduate option representative. BIOLOGY (Bi)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Graduate students in biology come with very diverse undergraduate  preparationŠmajors in physics, chemistry, mathematics, or psychology,  as well as in biology and its various branches. The aims of the graduate program are to provide, for each student, individual depth of experience  Special Regulations388and competence in a particular chosen major specialty; perception of the  nature and logic of biology as a whole; sufficient strength in basic science  to allow continued self-education after formal training has been completed  and thus to keep in the forefront of changing fields; and the motivation to  serve his or her field productively through a long career.  In accordance with these aims, the graduate study program in biol -ogy includes the following parts: (a) the major program, which is to  provide the student with early and intense original research experience  in a self-selected subject of biology, supplemented with advanced  course work and independent study in this subject; and (b) a program  of course work designed to provide well-rounded and integrated train -ing in biology and the appropriate basic sciences, which is adjusted  to special interests and needs. An individual program will be recom -mended to each student in a meeting with the student™s advisory com -mittee (see below). The Division of Biology and Biological Engineering does not encourage applications from students who have pursued  undergraduate study in biology at the Institute, because the broader  perspective to be gained from graduate study in a different setting is  considered to be essential for the full development of each student™s  potential. Exceptions to this policy may be considered by the faculty of  the division if there are circumstances that indicate that it would be in  the best interests of a student to pursue graduate study at the Institute. Bi AdmissionApplicants are expected to meet the following minimal requirements:  mathematics through calculus, general physics, organic chemistry,  physical chemistry (or the equivalent), and elementary biology. Students  with deficient preparation in one or more of these categories may be  admitted but required to remedy their deficiencies in the first years of  graduate training, with no graduate credit being granted for such reme -dial study. This will usually involve taking courses in the categories in  which the student has deficiencies. In certain instances, however, defi -ciencies may be corrected by examinations following independent or  supervised study apart from formal courses. Furthermore, the program  in biology is diverse, and in particular fields such as psychobiology and experimental psychology, or in interdisciplinary programs, other  kinds of undergraduate preparation may be substituted for the general  requirements listed above. When feasible, visits to the campus for personal interviews will be arranged before a final decision for admission is made. The GRE tests  (general and advanced subject) are not required and scores will not be  considered for admission. Bi Master™s Degree The biology option does not admit students for work toward the M.S.  degree. In special circumstances the M.S. degree may be awarded,  provided Institute requirements are met. In general, the degree is not  conferred until the end of the second year of residence. The degree  does not designate any of the disciplines of the division, but is an M.S. in biology. The 135 units required by the Institute must include any two  courses from the series Bi 250 abcd and Bi 252. 389Bi Degree of Doctor of Philosophy Major Subjects of SpecializationA student may pursue major work leading to the doctoral degree in  any of the following subjects: biophysics, cellular biology, develop -mental biology, genetics, immunology, microbiology, molecular biology  and biochemistry, and systems biology. At graduation, a student may  choose whether the degree is to be awarded in biology or in the select -ed major subject. Students who choose to work in Neurobiology may  also qualify for a Ph.D. in Biology but are encouraged to enroll in the  Neurobiology option. Initial Advisory MeetingAt the start of the first year of study, incoming students meet with the  option representative or faculty member(s) specified by the option rep -resentative. The purpose of this meeting is to assist the student in orga -nizing laboratory rotations, and to discuss what additional course work is  desirable in light of the student™s past record.  RotationsThe major initial responsibility of each student is to explore the var -ious research possibilities available at Caltech before settling into a  laboratory for their thesis research. Students are free to rotate in any  laboratory at Caltech, not just those in the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering. First-year students should carry out a minimum of two laboratory rotations; three rotations are recommended. It is gen -erally expected that rotations will last a full academic quarter; however,  exceptions can be granted with the advance permission of the profes -sor. Choice of laboratory should be made by the end of June of the first  year except in extraordinary circumstances. Any exception should be  discussed with the option representative. Formal Classes During the first year of graduate studies, students are required to take  Responsible Conduct of Research (Bi 252) and at least two courses  from the series (Bi 250 abcd) that covers the breadth of fields represent-ed in biology at Caltech. During each year that they are matriculated in the Ph.D. program, students are required to take Bi 251 abc (Biolunch).  Students will be required to present their thesis research in Biolunch during their second and fourth years of study. In addition to these fixed  requirements, during their time at Caltech students must take three additional 100-series or 200-series courses (9 or more units each; grade  of B or higher in each course), at least one of which must focus on mathematical or statistical methods relevant to biology.Teaching All students are to serve as teaching assistants for one quarter per year  they are in residence, up through the third year.  Special Regulations390Admission to Candidacy During winter quarter of the second year, a student is to set up a thesis  proposal examining committee and prepare a proposal focused on the  research project that they expect to pursue for their thesis research.  The proposal is defended by the student in an oral presentation in  front of the thesis proposal examining committee by the end of June.  (Although it is anticipated that this exam will be completed by June of the second year, it can be delayed until August of the third year if the  option representative agrees.) The examining committee comprises  four faculty members, at least three of whom should hold full or joint  professorial appointments in the Division of Biology and Biological  Engineering. One of the members of the committee is appointed as  chair. The chair of the thesis examining committee must be a Caltech  faculty member other than the student™s adviser. The adviser can, but  need not be, a member of the examining committee. The members of  the thesis proposal examining committee must certify passage of this  exam. In the event that there is inadequate evidence of the capacity  to do research, the student may be allowed to petition to re-take the  oral exam at a later time. However, in cases where the committee  deems it unlikely that the student will be able to pass a subsequent  attempt, the student may be advised to leave the program. In any  event, a student cannot remain in the program beyond August of the  third year without having successfully completed the requirements for  admission to candidacy, except in extraordinary circumstances and  with the approval of the option representative and the dean of gradu -ate studiesThesis Advisory Committee MeetingsOnce a student has been formally admitted to candidacy, they are to  pick a Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC). This committee is often the  same as the thesis proposal exam committee, but that need not be the  case. The thesis adviser must be a member of the TAC. The TAC typi -cally has four members. At least three must be professorial faculty who  hold a full or joint appointment in the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering. It is expected that students who have been admitted to candidacy will meet with the TAC once a year for the remainder of  their time at Caltech. Students who fail to meet with their TAC in any  one year may be deemed to not be maintaining satisfactory progress  toward the Ph.D. degree and will be prevented from registering for the  subsequent academic year. Maintaining Satisfactory Progress It is the policy of the biology option that a graduate student who is making satisfactory progress toward a Ph.D. degree can expect to con -tinue as a registered student with full financial support. To be deemed  as making satisfactory progress, a student is expected to fulfill the  expectations listed below. In the event that satisfactory progress is  not being made, a student can petition to receive the M.S. degree, for  which they must have successfully completed one full year of graduate study. Requirements for satisfactory progress include:  391Ł  Completion of the first-year course requirements during the first  year.  Ł  Joining a laboratory in which a student will perform thesis  research before the end of the first year in residence.  Ł  Passing the qualifying examination and completing admission to  candidacy before the start of the fourth year in residence.  Ł  Holding a Thesis Advisory Committee meeting in each subse -quent year of studies, and having the thesis committee verify that satisfactory progress is being made. Ł  Serving as a teaching assistant for one quarter of each academic year spent in residence through third year.  Ł  Completing Ph.D. studies by the end of the sixth year.  In the event that the student, option representative, and adviser are in  agreement, it is possible to make exceptions to the above guidelines and  remain in good standing. Extension of thesis work beyond twenty-four  terms requires that the student petition the dean of graduate studies for  permission to register. Extensions beyond the seventh year will be allowed  only in unusual circumstances. Once a student has passed admission to  candidacy, the responsibility for assessing satisfactory progress lies largely  with the student™s Thesis Advisory Committee. If a majority of the commit -tee deems that a student is not making satisfactory progress, the student  is at risk of being removed from the program at any time at the discretion  of the option representative. Examination CommitteeRequirements for the Ph.D. thesis and examination are determined  by the Ph.D. examination committee that is appointed by the dean of graduate studies for each degree candidate. This committee is usually  the same as the Thesis Advisory Committee, but this need not be the case. The composition of the committee must be approved by the  option representative. The committee usually has four members. At  least three must be professorial faculty who hold a full or joint appoint -ment in the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering.Thesis and Final ExaminationThe thesis and associated publications are expected to demonstrate  that the student has learned how to conceive, plan, and execute experi -mental and/or theoretical work that reveals new biological information. In  addition, it must reveal a deep, broad, and rigorous understanding of the  area of research to which the thesis is relevant. Two weeks after copies of the thesis are provided to the examining  committee, chairman, and option representative, the candidate collects  the copies and comments for correction. At this time, the date for the  final examination is set at the discretion of the thesis advisor and the  division chair. The final oral examination covers principally the work of  the thesis, and according to Institute regulations must be held at least  two weeks before the degree is conferred. A digital copy of the thesis is  required of the graduate for the Institute library, including both PDF and  original source files. Both should be deposited into CaltechTHESIS.  Special Regulations392Caltech-Kaiser Permanente School of Medicine MD/PhD Program There is a dual-degree program between Caltech and the Kaiser  Permanente School of Medicine (KPSOM) for the granting of the M.D./Ph.D. degree. Students receive their medical training at KPSOM, and  perform their Ph.D. work with any member of the Caltech faculty.  Admission to this dual-degree program is made through the KPSOM  M.D./Ph.D. process. The M.D. degree is awarded by KPSOM, and the  Ph.D. is awarded by Caltech.  The dual-degree program is directed by Dr. Jose M. Barral, M.D., Ph.D.  at KPSOM and Professor Paul Sternberg at Caltech. For more informa -tion, see medschool.kp.org/education/curriculum#dual-degrees .Caltech-UCLA Medical Scientist Training Program (MSTP) A joint program between Caltech and the UCLA Medical School has  been established for the granting of the M.D./Ph.D. degree. Students  do their preclinical and clinical work at UCLA, and their Ph.D. work with  any member of the Caltech faculty, including the biology, chemistry,  and engineering and applied science divisions.Admission to this joint program is made through the usual UCLA  MSTP process, checking a box indicating interest in the Caltech option.  Students will be accepted into the joint program, funds permitting. The  M.D. degree would be from UCLA and the Ph.D. would be awarded by  Caltech. The current Directors of the UCLA MSTP are Dr.  Olujimi Ajijola and Dr. David Dawson, and Caltech Professor Mitch Guttman is the  Associate Director. For more information, see mstp.healthsciences. ucla.edu.Caltech-USC MD/PhD Program A joint program between Caltech and the USC (Keck) Medical School has  been established for the granting of the M.D./Ph.D. degree. Students do  their preclinical and clinical work at USC, and their Ph.D. work with any  member of the Caltech faculty. Admission to this joint program is made through the usual USC pro -cess, checking a box indicating interest in the Caltech option. Students  will be accepted into the joint program, funds permitting. The M.D. degree  would be from USC and the Ph.D. would be awarded by Caltech. The current Director of the USC M.D./Ph.D. program is Dr. David  Hinton. The Director for Caltech is Professor Paul Sternberg. For more  information, see keck.usc.edu/md-Ph.D.-program. Bi Subject MinorA student majoring in any non-biology option of the Institute may, with  the approval of the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering,  elect a subject minor in any of the subjects listed above under major subjects of specialization. Requirements for such a minor are deter -mined by the faculty committee designated for each subject. A minor program in biology is also available to students of other divisions. Such  a program shall consist of 45 units of upper division course work in  the Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, with each course 393passed with a grade of C or better. Approval of each program must be  obtained from the biology graduate option representative. A student  majoring in another division who elects a subject minor in biology may,  if desired, arrange to have the minor designated as biology, rather than  with the name of the specific minor subject.CHEMICAL ENGINEERING (ChE)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Programs The general objective of the graduate work in chemical engineering is to produce individuals who are exceptionally well trained to apply  mathematics, the physical, chemical, and biological sciences, and engi-neering to the understanding of systems involving chemical reactions,  transport phenomena, and materials/energy transformations, and to the  development of new processes and materials. The program also strives  to develop in each student self-reliance, creativity, professional ethics,  and an appreciation of the societal impact of chemical engineering and  the importance of continuing intellectual growth.  ChE AdmissionIt is expected that each applicant for graduate study in chemical engi-neering will have studied mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, and  chemical engineering to the extent that these subjects are covered in  the required undergraduate courses at Caltech. In case the applicant™s  training is not equivalent, admission may be granted but the option may prescribe additional work in these subjects before recommending  them as a candidate for a degree.  ChE Master™s Degree  Although there is no formal M.S. program in ChE, in the course of their  Ph.D. program students may apply for an M.S. degree by submitting  an approved thesis and meeting all the other institute requirements for  the M.S. program. The thesis must be approved by both the student™s  adviser and option representative.  Course RequirementsAt least 135 units of coursework must be completed in order to satisfy  the Institute requirements. These units must include ChE 151ab, ChE  152, ChE/Ch 165, 18 additional units of advanced courses in chemical engineering, 27 units of science or engineering electives, and 18 units of general electives. With advanced permission from the option repre -sentative, general electives may include courses in the humanities and  an M.S. degree. Finally, the M.S. requirements include at least 27 units  of research, ChE 280, which represents two terms of research under  the supervision of a chemical engineering faculty member.   Special Regulations394Research ReportAt least three weeks before the degree is to be conferred, a research  report on the work performed under ChE 280 must be submitted to  both the student™s adviser and the option representative.  ChE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 1. Courseworka.  Initial Consultation: Upon arrival at Caltech, the ChE Ph.D. students  will meet with the ChE option representative to discuss the pro -gram, adviser selection, and expectations for the first and second  terms. During these two terms, students are expected to take a  normal load of three courses per term plus 9 units of research  (ChE 280) to cover the rotation (see below). The courses during  the first term include one each in advanced Kinetics (ChE 152) and  Thermodynamics (ChE 165), and a third course in an area of need  or an area that lines up with the research interests of the student.  The courses during the second term include one each in advanced  Transport (ChE 151 a) and Statistical Thermodynamics (ChE 164)  and a third course as above. The third course taken during the first  and second terms must be at least 9 units and graded. The entire  first year of study will also be discussed.b.  Course Requirements:  During the first year, Ph.D. students are  required to take the five core courses: ChE 151ab, ChE 152, ChE  164, ChE 165, plus one additional ChE course from the following  list: ChE 112, 115, Ch/ChE 140, 147, 148, 155, ChE/ESE 157, 158, 159, ChE/BE 163, 174. The core courses must be graded  and a minimum grade of B- is required in each one. There is  also a minimum GPA requirement of 2.5 each term of all courses  taken. Failure to meet these grade and GPA requirements places  the student in a state of deficiency, which may lead to termina -tion of the program if not corrected promptly. c.  Subject Minor or External Coursework:  Each student is required  to complete either a subject minor or a general program of cours -es outside chemical engineering. The general program of courses  consists of at least 54 units. A maximum of 27 units from the  following list of doubly-listed courses can be used by graduate  students as part of the 54-unit requirement: ESE/ChE 158; ChE/ Ch 140, 147, 148, 155, ESE/Ge/Ch 171. A course in the ACM  100ab sequence will be credited 9 units instead of the nominal 12  units as listed in the catalog. Courses in the Humanities, Arts, and  Linguistics are explicitly excluded from the general program. The  requirements for a subject minor in other options may be found in  the current  Caltech Catalog. The general program of courses must  be submitted and approved by the Option Representative after  the candidacy exam. All courses chosen must be at the graduate  level and should constitute an integrated program of study rather  than a randomly chosen collection of courses outside chemical  engineering. A grade of C or better is required in any of these  courses to remain qualified for the Ph.D. program. 3952. Research AdviserThe choice of a research adviser is perhaps the most important deci -sion a graduate student makes during the first year of graduate study.  This decision must be made before the end of the second term of the  first year, and so it is reasonable to devote significant thought and  effort to this task before then. In the first two weeks of the fall quarter, all faculty will present over -views of their research program during informal evening sessions. All  first-year students must attend all of these sessions. Following these presentations, the students are expected to meet individually with at  least two faculty members to discuss proposed research projects and  the possibility of doing a rotation in that faculty member™s group during  the first or second terms. All students must formally join a group by the  end of the second term.3. RotationsRotations serve to acquaint the student with a group™s research area  and style. Two rotations are required, one each during the first and sec -ond terms. During a rotation, the student must participate in research  activities in the chosen group for at least nine hours per week under  the tutelage of a faculty or senior group member. At the end of a rota -tion, the student must produce a research report and give a group  presentation. Afterwards, a rotation completion form must be signed  by the rotation adviser and returned to the ChE option representative.  At the same time, the student and the faculty member must determine whether the ﬁmatchﬂ of research interests and personalities is good. In  the instance of a positive outcome, the student may remain in the same  group for a second rotation. Otherwise, the student should proceed to  do a second rotation in another group with the same requirements as  above. Certain funding agencies (e.g. NIH) require a second rotation  in a different group. In that case, the student will be asked to do so,  even if she/he desired to remain in a particular group; the student may  return to join the first group after completion of the second rotation. All  students must find advisers and formally join a group by the end of the  second term. Failure to do so terminates the Ph.D. program at Caltech  and the student will be asked to leave.4. Candidacy ExamAll students are required to pass the candidacy examination, ideally  before the official start of the second year, or at the latest by October  15 of the second year. This oral exam is administered by a Candidacy  Committee and consists of two parts:  a.  A presentation by the student based on the contents of a     research progress report.  b.  A background questions part broadly related to the    research problem presented. Special Regulations396The research progress report must be submitted to the Candidacy  Committee members and the ChE option representative by August 31  of the first year in residence. The report should expound on the research  pursued by the student and is expected to exhibit originality and a pro -fessional quality of exposition. It should outline the research problem, the  proposed approach, the expected contributions in the general problem  area, and the progress of the student at the time of writing. It should also  provide clear evidence of the student™s understanding of the research  topic, the underlying science and technology related to that research,  and the student™s mastering of the relevant techniques and methodology  necessary to pursue the proposed research. The Candidacy Committee should consist of no fewer than four vot-ing members of the Caltech faculty, with at least three being chemical  engineering faculty. To ensure the impartiality of the committee, the  chairperson and at least one more of the committee members must have  no direct advisory relationship with the candidate. The choice of the  oral exam committee will be made by the student and his/her research  adviser and must be approved by the ChE option representative. It is  the responsibility of the student to obtain approval from each proposed  committee member for the date and time of the oral exam. The list of the  recommended committee members must be submitted to the Option  Representative at the same time as the research progress report. The second component of the oral exam consists of chemical engineering background questions relating broadly to the student™s  research topic. The chairperson of the Candidacy Committee shall be  responsible for ensuring that the questions are at an appropriate level,  consistent with that of undergraduates at Caltech. For example, if the  Ph.D. focus is on heterogeneous catalysis, the student must be able  to answer questions on basics such as: surface reaction mechanisms,  diffusion/reaction in porous media, and multi-component gas-phase  transport, etc. Similar considerations apply to Ph.D. projects related  to fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, basic biology, physics, chem -istry, etc. The advanced courses taken during the first year should  help you prepare well for this part of the exam. Serious gaps in the  understanding of classical chemical engineering concepts, approaches,  and methodologies applicable to your research may lead to failing the  exam even if research progress is deemed adequate. Furthermore, for  interdisciplinary projects going beyond classical chemical engineering,  the student will be expected to demonstrate good understanding of the  fundamentals in other areas directly relevant to their project. The candidacy exam may have three outcomes: Pass, Conditional  Pass, or Fail. Passing the candidacy exam admits the student to candi-dacy for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Failing the candidacy exam  terminates the student™s Ph.D. program at Caltech. When course require -ments are met, the student may be awarded an M.S. degree at the rec -ommendation of the Candidacy Committee. Conditional Pass is a special  outcome granted only when the student has clearly passed the back-ground questions component, but the committee deems that more is  needed on the research front. In this case, the committee chair will put in  writing what is required and the time frame to meet those requirements.  Under no circumstances is this time to exceed one term. Meeting the  397stipulated requirements must be reflected in a revised candidacy report,  which must be submitted to and approved by the Candidacy Committee  by the set deadline. It is at the discretion of the committee to request a  re-examination. In any case, a Pass or Fail decision must be reached at  the latest by December 15 of the second year in residence. This is a hard  deadline for both the student and the committee. If there is no communi -cation to the ChE option representative by December 15, a Fail decision  will be entered automatically.  5. Thesis Review CommitteeAfter the student passes the candidacy exam, the Candidacy Committee  becomes the ﬁde-factoﬂ Thesis Review Committee, which will be  responsible for reviewing the student™s progress. The committee must  be convened (as a group) during the third year of residency, and every  year thereafter to review progress, suggest improvements in research,  or resolve any issues that could potentially delay graduation beyond the  fifth year of residency. It is the responsibility of the student to organize  the annual meetings of the Thesis Review Committee, which may be  convened at any time during the year but at least three months before  registration for the next academic year is due. Subsequent registration  beyond the fourth year is subject to written approval by the Thesis  Review Committee and the ChE option representative. In order to expe -dite the review, the student should submit a two- or three-page concise  outline of progress and of proposed future research to each member of  his/her committee before the annual review meeting. 6. Final Thesis and Oral Defense As a final step in the Ph.D. program, the student is required to submit a  satisfactory thesis, present a ChE seminar (open to the general public),  and pass a final oral examination. Procedures for Seminar, Exam, and Committee Selection:  At least three weeks prior to the exam date, the ChE Graduate Records  Secretary must be given the title of the seminar, date, time and loca -tion. Both the seminar and exam should be scheduled on the same day, with the exam immediately following the seminar. The committee  members will be determined by the student and their research advis -er, and must be approved by the ChE option representative and the  dean of graduate studies. The examining committee must include at least four members, of which at least three are voting members of the  Caltech faculty and at least two are ChE faculty; one member of the  committee may be from off-campus with prior approval of the ChE  option representative. 7. Graduate Teaching Assignment Duties All Ph.D. students are required to perform a minimum of 24 term-hours  of GTA duties within the ChE Department during their studies. The GTA  duties will normally be assigned after the first year in residence. Most  Special Regulations398students find the teaching assistantship a valuable experience for their future careers. Teaching assistantships outside ChE are permitted but  the hours do not count toward the 24-hour TA requirement. Additional InformationAdditional information about graduate study requirements and proce -dures is provided in the chemical engineering graduate studies guide,  distributed annually to first-year chemical engineering graduate stu-dents.CHEMISTRY (C h)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The Caltech chemistry option offers a program of graduate study  leading to the Ph.D. degree, with the goal of preparing students for a  lifetime of independent research and scientific leadership in the chem -ical sciences, through careers in academia, industry, or government.  Modern chemistry strives to achieve a molecular-level understanding  of the natural world and thus forms the basis for much of modern sci -ence, including biology, medicine, materials, nanotechnology, energy  and environment. The program of study, while anchored in the tradi -tional areas of organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, chemical biology,  biochemistry and biophysics, chemical physics, and theoretical chem -istry, is flexible and highly interdisciplinary.  The graduate program in chemistry emphasizes research. This  emphasis reflects the Institute™s traditional leadership in chemi -cal research and the conviction that has permeated the Division of  Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from its founding, that participa -tion in original research is the best way to awaken, develop, and give  direction to creativity.  The program is designed to encourage students to begin their  research early in their first year. Students can elect to do research that  crosses the boundaries of traditionally separate areas of chemistry, for  in this relatively compact division, they are encouraged to go where  their scientific curiosity drives them. A thesis that involves more than  one adviser is not uncommon, and interdisciplinary programs with  biology, physics, geology, chemical engineering, and environmental sci -ence and engineering science are open and encouraged. An extensive program of seminars will enable students to hear of  and discuss notable work in chemical physics, organic chemistry, inor -ganic chemistry and electrochemistry, organometallic chemistry, and  biochemistry and molecular biophysics. Graduate students are also  encouraged to attend seminars in other divisions.Ch Learning Outcomes Students upon whom are conferred the Ph.D. degree have provided  evidence of independent scholarship and scientific creativity through  the performance of original research, which is described in their doc -toral thesis and defended orally. Students must also demonstrate an  399ability to conceive new research directions by preparing and defending  a set of written research propositions. Ch Course Program  A student is required to complete at least five courses, each being  nine units or more, in science or engineering. At least one course must  be in a field substantially outside the research area of the student.  Courses may be either inside or outside the chemistry option, must be numbered 100 or greater, and must be taken on a letter-grade basis  with a grade of B or above. The student should discuss, with his or her adviser, which courses best serve his or her individual needs. The pro -gram of courses must be approved by the research adviser and by the  Chemistry Graduate Study Committee.Ch Master™s Degree Students are not ordinarily admitted to graduate work leading to an  M.S. degree. Under special circumstances, and with prior approval of  the Graduate Study Committee, a master™s degree can be obtained.  All master™s programs for the degree in chemistry must include at  least 45 units of chemical research and must satisfy the Course  Program described above. The remaining electives may be satisfied by  advanced work in any area of mathematics, science or engineering, or  by chemical research. A satisfactory thesis describing this research,  including a one-page digest or summary of the main results obtained,  must be submitted to the divisional graduate studies office at least 10  days before the degree is to be conferred. In addition, the fulfillment  of the thesis requirement must be signed off by a designated faculty  member on the M.S. candidacy form and a final copy of the thesis submitted to the Graduate Office no later than two weeks before the  degree is to be conferred. The copies of the thesis should be prepared  according to the directions formulated by the dean of graduate studies  and should be accompanied by a statement of approval of the thesis,  signed by the adviser directing the research and by the chair of the  Chemistry Graduate Study Committee. Ch Degree of Doctor of Philosophy Selecting a Research ProjectSoon after a new graduate student arrives in the laboratories, they attend  a series of orientation seminars that introduce students to the active  research interests of the faculty. Students then meet with each of five  or more faculty whose fields attract them, to discuss in detail potential  research problems. They eventually settle upon the outlines of a research  problem that interests them and select a specific research adviser (or set  of co-advisers). Neither students nor faculty can make a commitment to  an adviser-advisee relationship prior to the end of the first month of the fall  term. Students typically begin research during their first academic year. CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the doctor™s degree in chemistry,  in addition to demonstrating an understanding and knowledge of the  Special Regulations400fundamentals of chemistry, a student must give satisfactory evidence  of proficiency at a high level in the primary field of interest, as approved  by the division. This is accomplished by an oral candidacy examination,  which must be held during or before the fifth term of graduate residence  (excluding summer terms). The candidacy committee shall consist of  the thesis adviser(s) and two additional faculty members; at least two of  the three members must be chemistry faculty. The committee should be  considered as a resource for the student for the remainder of his or her  studies. At the candidacy examination, a student is asked to demon-strate scientific and professional competence and promise by discussing  a research report and propositions as described below. The research report should describe progress and accomplishments  to date and plans for future research. Two original research propositions,  or brief scientific theses, must accompany the report, and at least one  must be well removed from the student™s field of research. These prop -ositions should reflect his or her breadth of familiarity with the literature,  originality, and ability to pose and analyze suitable scientific research  problems. The research report and propositions must be in the hands of  the examining committee as a bound, hard-copy document one week  before the examination. The result of the candidacy examination may be either (a) pass, (b)  fail, or (c) conditional. Conditional status is granted when the committee decides that deficiencies in a student™s research report, propositions,  or overall progress can be remedied in a specific and relatively brief  period of time. In order to change conditional to pass status, the stu -dent must correct the indicated deficiencies or in some cases schedule  a new examination the following term. The student must be admitted to candidacy at least three terms before the final oral examination. A  student cannot continue graduate work in chemistry (nor can financial assistance be continued) past the end of the sixth term of residence  without being admitted to candidacy, except by petitioning the division  for special permission. This permission, to be requested by a petition  submitted to the Graduate Study Committee stating a proposed timeta -ble for correction of deficiencies, must be submitted before registration  for each subsequent term (including the summer following the sixth term of residence) until admission to candidacy is achieved. Graduate Teaching Assignment Duties All Ph.D. students are required to perform a minimum of one 9 term- hour GTA within the chemistry option before the completion of the  fourth year of study. Most students find the teaching assistantship a  valuable experience for their future careers. Language RequirementThere is no formal foreign language requirement for the Ph.D. in chem -istry. However, the division believes strongly in the professional impor -tance to chemists of knowledge of foreign languages and encourages  their study prior to graduate work or while in graduate school.401Ph.D. Thesis CommitteeIn the third year, the student in consultation with their adviser will form  their Ph.D. thesis committee. This committee will comprise at least four faculty members and will generally consist of the original candidacy committee plus an additional member of the faculty; at least three of  the members must be from the chemistry option. The student must  meet with their committee annually, beginning in the third year. At these  informal meetings, the student will update the committee on the status of their research.  Typically, a student will provide an updated CV, a short research  summary (2-3 pages), and a brief outline of plans for the coming year. Fourth Year Progress Meeting Before the 13th academic term of graduate residence (excluding summer  terms), the student will be expected to demonstrate satisfactory progress  in the course of thesis research. To this end, an informal meeting with  the Ph.D. thesis committee will be held. Typically, a student provides  an updated CV, a short research summary (2-3 pages), a thesis outline  with %-completed for each chapter, and a timeline for completion of the  degree. At the meeting, the student will likely present an oral summary of  research completed to date as well as an outline of future research plans.  Following the discussion, an appropriate timetable for completion of the  degree requirements will be discussed and agreed upon. It is also com -mon to discuss plans for post-Caltech at the meeting.Length of Graduate ResidenceAny graduate student who anticipates a need to register for a 24th  academic term must hold a meeting of his or her thesis committee and present the institute-required petition for permission to register that  includes a plan of action for the period of the requested registration  and a specific date for the completion of the degree requirements. This  petition must be approved by the Thesis Committee, by the chair of  the Chemistry Graduate Study Committee and, in cases where financial  support is an issue, by the executive officer or division chair, before it is  forwarded to the dean of graduate studies. Financial support of grad -uate students who are required to petition to register will not normally  be provided through teaching assistantships. Failure to complete the  degree requirements by the date specified in the petition would require  the entire approval process to be repeated. This process must be  repeated for every subsequent year. Thesis and Final ExaminationThe final examination will consist in part of the oral presentation and  defense of a brief résumé of the student™s research and in part of the  defense of a set of propositions they prepare. Three original research  propositions are required. No more than one of these may be a car -ryover from the candidacy examination, and at least one must be  well removed from the field of research. Each proposition shall be  stated explicitly and the argument presented in writing with adequate  documentation. The propositions should display originality, breadth  Special Regulations402of interest, and soundness of training; a student will be judged on  the selection and formulation of the propositions as well as on the  defense of them. Formulating a set of propositions should begin early  in the course of graduate study. To emphasize the importance of these propositions, there will  be a separate examination on the three propositions by the Ph.D.  thesis committee. This examination on the propositions is normally  taken after the thesis research progress meeting, but not less than  10 weeks in advance of the final doctoral examination. A copy of the  propositions, along with suitable abstracts, must be submitted to the  examining committee not less than two weeks before the propositions  examination. These propositions must be acceptable to the commit -tee before the final doctoral examination can be scheduled. A copy of the thesis must be submitted to each member of the  thesis committee not less than two weeks before the final doctoral  examination. A copy of the thesis should also be submitted to the  Graduate Office for proofreading three weeks prior to the final doc -toral examination. Two final copies (one on Permalife paper) are to be  submitted to the Graduate Office. Ch Subject MinorGraduate students in other options taking chemistry as a subject minor will be assigned a faculty adviser in chemistry by the Chemistry Graduate Study Committee. In consultation with this adviser, the stu -dent will work out an integrated program of courses, including at least  45 units of formal course work at the 100 level or above. This program  must be approved by the Chemistry Graduate Study Committee, and a  grade point average of 3.0 in the approved program will be required. CIVIL ENGINEERING (CE)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program Civil Engineering (CE) research and study are offered through the  Department of Mechanical and Civil Engineering (MCE). The degrees of  Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) and Master of Science (M.S.) are offered.  In general, students who intend to work full-time toward the Ph.D.  degree as a final degree objective are admitted to the Civil Engineering  Graduate Program. The M.S. degree is typically only awarded to stu -dents who pursue the Ph.D. degree in civil engineering at Caltech and  who do not already have an M.S. degree in civil engineering. The aim of the graduate program in civil engineering at Caltech is  to prepare students for research and professional practice in an era of  rapidly advancing interdisciplinary technology. The program combines  individual depth of experience and competence in a particular chosen major specialty, with a strong background in the basic and engineering  sciences. It strives to develop professional independence, creativity,  leadership, and the capacity for continuing professional and intellectual  growth. 403CE Preparation for the Graduate Program Entering graduate students are expected to have a thorough back -ground in undergraduate mathematics, physics, and engineering. While  a strong undergraduate program in civil engineering should provide a  suitable preparation, students who have not specialized in civil engi -neering as undergraduates may also be admitted for graduate study.  For example, an outstanding four-year undergraduate program in  mathematics and sciences may provide a suitable background as well.  The qualifications of each applicant will be considered individually, and,  after being enrolled, the student will arrange his or her program in con -sultation with a member of the faculty. CE Master™s Degree  The degree of Master of Science in civil engineering is only awarded to  students who do not already have an M.S. degree in civil engineering.  The degree will be awarded upon request by students who have ful -filled the requirements. Only in exceptional cases is there admission to  the M.S. program as the final degree objective. A minimum of 138 units of courses numbered 100 or above, which  meet the required master™s program listed below, must be passed with  a grade of at least C for completion of the master™s degree in civil engi -neering. All units must be taken for grades, except for courses offered  only on a pass/fail basis. The M.S. degree in civil engineering is typical -ly completed within the first two years of residency at Caltech. Each student™s program must be approved by the adviser and option  representative in mechanical and civil engineering before registering for  the course.Required Master™s Program a)  Graduate civil engineering core (45 units). These units should  provide a solid base for the student™s engineering interest.  The courses should be selected from the Core CE  subjects listed under the of the Degree of Doctor of  Philosophy Description and Requirements section. b)  Mathematics, engineering, and research electives, except  seminar courses (63 units). Research can be included up to a  maximum of 27 units.c)  Free electives (27 units). Any course with a number of 100 or  greater may be selected, except that research units and seminar  courses can not be included. d)  Graduate Engineering Seminar, AM/CE/ME 150 abc (3 units). CE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  CE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy The Ph.D. degree in civil engineer -ing is focused on research. Study and research programs for the Ph.D.  degree are individually planned to fit the interests and background of  the student. A comprehensive research project resulting in an original  contribution to the field, which is documented by a thesis, is required.  Institute requirements for the Ph.D. degree are described in the section  on degree requirements. A minimum of three academic years in resi -Special Regulations404dence as a graduate student are required by the Institute, and two or  more additional years are usually needed for preparation of the thesis. Advising and Thesis SupervisionAn interim adviser is appointed for each student upon admission to a graduate degree in civil engineering. The interim adviser will serve  as the primary mentor until the student finds a research adviser. It  is the responsibility of the student to find an academic and research  adviser within three terms of graduate residence at Caltech. In consul -tation with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  Committee within four terms of graduate residence at Caltech. This  committee shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech pro -fessorial faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in mechan -ical and civil engineering. The committee shall meet as requested by  the student. Further, the committee shall meet annually to review prog -ress and to approve the registration of the student beyond the fifth year  of graduate residence at Caltech. The adviser and the Thesis Advisory Committee provide the majority of  mentoring to the student. In addition, the Option Representative and other  members of the faculty are always available to provide advice and mento -ring on any aspect of research, progress toward the Ph.D., future careers,  and other aspects of graduate school.Admission to Candidacy To be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in civil engi -neering, the student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements, do the following:  as his or her academic and research adviser before the end of  the third term of graduate residence at Caltech. In consultation  with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  Committee before the end of the fourth term. This committee  shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech professori -al faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in mechan -ical and civil engineering. -dacy examination before the end of the eighth term of graduate  academic residence at Caltech. If the student has chosen a sub -ject minor, an examination on the subject of that program may be  included at the request of the discipline offering the subject minor.  above, that fulfill the required Ph.D. program listed below. All  units must be taken for grades and passed with a grade of at least a C, except for courses offered only on a pass/fail basis.  The course work towards the Ph.D. degree in civil engineering  is typically completed within the first three years of residency at  Caltech.Required Ph.D. Program a)  Civil Engineering Core Subjects (45 units): Course work in core   subjects selected from the list below; pass with a grade of at  405least C: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc, Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc, AM/CE 151, Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab, ME/CE 163, Ae/CE 165 ab, ME/CE/Ge 174, CE 181 ab, Ae/AM/MS/ME 213, Ae/AM/CE/ME 214, Ae 220,Ae/CE 221, Ae/AM/ME 223, AM/CE/ ME 252, ME/Ge/Ae 266 ab.b)  Electives or Minor (63 units): Additional engineering or science courses with course number 101 or above, except seminar or research courses. Pass with a grade of at least C, courses that  are approved by the Thesis Advisory Committee. These courses  are intended to provide further depth and incorporate breadth.  These units can be used to satisfy a minor requirement in anoth -er option. c)  Advanced mathematics or applied mathematics (27 units): Pass with a grade of at least C, chosen in consultation with adviser from the following list: ACM 101 or higher, CDS 232, Ma 108 or  higher, Ph 129. The requirement in mathematics is in addition to  the requirements above.  d)  Graduate engineering seminar (6 units): Six terms of AM/CE/ME 150 abc, within 12 terms or 3 years in residence at Caltech. e)  Research (54 units): Successfully complete at least 54 units of   research and demonstrate satisfactory research progress. Registration Beyond the Sixth Year of Graduate Residence The annual approval of the Ph.D. Thesis Advisory Committee is neces -sary for registration beyond the 24th academic term of graduate resi -dence at Caltech.Thesis and Final ExaminationThe thesis examination will be given after the thesis has been formally  completed. This examination will be a defense of the doctoral thesis and  a test of the candidate™s knowledge in the specialized field of research.  The format of the examination can be chosen from the following two  options, by the student, in consultation with their research adviser: (i)  a public seminar presented by the candidate, with an open question  period, followed by a private examination by the Examining Committee  or (ii) a private presentation to the Examining Committee followed by  the examination, with a public seminar on another date. The Examining  Committee shall consist of a minimum of four voting members, three of  whom must be Caltech faculty; two members must be from MCE. The  Thesis Defense Committee shall be chaired by a committee member  who is an MCE Caltech professorial faculty member and not the stu -dent™s adviser. CE Subject MinorA student majoring in another branch of engineering or another division of the Institute may, with the approval of the faculty in the Department  of Mechanical and Civil Engineering and the faculty in his or her major field, elect civil engineering as a subject minor. The program of courses  must differ markedly from the major subject of study or research, and  must consist of at least 54 units of advanced courses (101 or above) approved by the faculty in mechanical and civil engineering. Special Regulations406COMPUTATION AND NEURAL SYSTEMS (CNS) CNS Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program An integrated approach to graduate study combining computation  and neural systems is organized jointly by the Division of Biology  and Biological Engineering, the Division of Engineering and Applied Science, and the Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences. This curriculum is designed to promote a broad knowledge of aspects of  molecular, cellular, and systems biology, cognitive neuroscience, com -putational biology and computational neuroscience, information and  learning theory, emergent or collective systems, and computer science  and electrical engineering in conjunction with an appropriate depth  of knowledge in the particular field of the thesis research. For more  details, see cns.caltech.edu.AdmissionIdeal applicants will have a Bachelor of Science degree or equivalent  with a strong quantitative background and some facility with computer  programming. They will have shown an interest in understanding the  brain and/or in autonomous intelligent systems. The GRE tests (general and advanced subject) are not required and scores will not be consid -ered for admission. Advisory Committee and TA Requirement An advisory committee of three CNS faculty members is constituted  for each student by the CNS admissions committee upon admission to  the program. The faculty in whose lab the student is staying first chairs  this committee. The advisory committee meets with the student when  they arrive, guides and approves first-year course choices, and answers  questions and offers advice about the program and the way of life in  CNS. The CNS faculty are available to students during the year for formal  and/or informal discussions.It is expected that each graduate student will serve as a teaching assistant in one or two CNS courses during his or her residency at  Caltech as part of the Ph.D. graduation requirement. CNS Master™s Degree Only students who expect to pursue the Ph.D. degree will be admitted  to the option. The master™s degree may be awarded in exception -al cases. The awarding of this degree requires fulfilling the Institute  requirements for a master™s degree, satisfying the option breadth  requirements (see following section), the completion of a master™s  thesis, and receiving from a candidacy examination oral committee a  recommendation for awarding the degree. Laboratory RotationsMandatory rotations through research groups (labs) provide a unique  opportunity for the student to experience the CNS culture. To broaden  the student™s knowledge and to provide familiarity with different tech -niques and ways of thinking or doing research, each student should  407carry out three 12-week laboratory rotations (one per term) during the  first year, and should engage in research. During each rotation, the stu -dent is expected to take part in the life and routine of the lab by attend -ing lab meetings, participating in research projects and discussions  with members of the lab, and meeting monthly with the faculty of that lab to discuss science.Course RequirementsSix nine-unit courses are required during the first year: CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/ NB 187, either Bi 9 or equivalent, or NB/Bi/CNS 150, a neurobiology or  modeling course, a math course, and two other CNS, Bi, EE, ACM, or Ph courses (for example, a schedule of CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186, CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187, NB/Bi/CNS 150, and CS/CNS/EE 156 satisfies this requirement). CNS students are required to take two additional classes:  the one-unit survey course CNS 100, and the four-unit course Bi 252.  These eight courses must be taken for letter grades. Students are free  to take additional classes, and a research adviser may require that a  student take a specific, complementary course as a requirement for  joining his or her lab.CandidacyFour faculty, including the three faculty in whose labs rotations have  been done, should be on the student™s candidacy exam committee. At  the end of the first year, the student is expected to decide on a research  group and begin work there. The first summer is thus expected to be  spent entirely on research in that lab. To be recommended for candidacy  you are required to pass two tests: the general knowledge exam, and the  research and candidacy exam. These exams are supervised by the CNS  option representative. The general knowledge exam satisfies the breadth requirement. A  list of about 100 questions, grouped by category, is available at  www.cns.caltech.edu, providing a clear idea of the scope of knowledge  that each student is expected to know well. Students are encouraged  to organize working and discussion groups to prepare for this exam;  the format and implementation of such a system, however, is left to the  students.This is an oral exam with the four faculty (including the heads of the student™s three rotation labs and one other chosen for ﬁbreadth,™™ of  whom one can be from outside Caltech). It should be scheduled by the  student (who contacts the committee members) to take place during the last six weeks of the third term of year one. For the exam, the stu -dent must answer questions (from more than one category) taken from  the list, which is modified each year. (The exam can be retaken after  three months.) The research and candidacy exam satisfies the depth requirement.  During year two, the student is expected to produce a piece of work of a  quality sufficient to be presented at a professional meeting. (The objec -tive of this description is to offer a way to calibrate the level of expected  research achievement and involvement. Professional acceptance of the  abstract or paper is not a requirement for passing candidacy.) This work  is presented in an oral exam in spring term of year two, before the same  Special Regulations408exam committee (if possible) that conducted part one of the exam. The  exam focuses exclusively on research (accomplished and/or planned).  During year two, the student may take other courses, as needed, but is  expected to present a high standard (quality, originality) of research at  the time of this second part of the candidacy exam.Thesis Advisory CommitteeOnce admitted to candidacy, the student chooses a Thesis Advisory  Committee of at least three faculty. This committee serves as a source  of advice independent of the Ph.D. adviser throughout the student™s  tenure. Each year, before the end of June, the student delivers a writ -ten progress report, followed by a meeting with the Thesis Advisory  Committee.Thesis Examination CommitteeThis committee should consist of a minimum of four voting members, three of whom must be Caltech faculty. The final oral examination  covers principally the works of the thesis, and according to Institute  regulations must be held at least three weeks before the degree is to  be conferred.  CNS Subject MinorStudents majoring in other fields may take a subject minor in CNS, pro -vided the program is supervised by a CNS adviser, is approved by the  CNS option representative, and consists of 45 units, including NB/Bi/ CNS 150, CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187, Bi 252, and other CNS cross-listed  classes. A subject minor is not required for the Ph.D. degree in CNS. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (CSE) Aims and Scope of the MinorComputational science and engineering (CSE) may be pursued as a sub-ject minor by graduate students who are pursuing Ph.D. degrees in any  option. The CSE minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s grad -uate degrees and is designed for students who wish to broaden their  knowledge of CSE beyond their major field of study. The CSE minor is  also intended to recognize graduate students™ interest in and dedication  to CSE as demonstrated by the successful completion of a program of  study in the field. Completion of the CSE minor program of study will be  recognized on the Ph.D. diploma by the statement, ﬁ–and by additional  studies constituting a minor in Computational Science and Engineering.ﬂRequirementsTo receive the CSE minor, graduate students must fulfill the following  requirements.  18 units (two terms) from the following list: ACM/EE 106 ab,  CMS/ACM/EE 122, ACM 114 ab, ACM 116, ACM 117, ACM 157, ACM 158, ACM 210 ab, ACM/IDS 216. 18 units (two terms) from the following list: CS 115,   409CS 138 abc, CMS/CS 139 abc, CS 143, CS/IDS 150 ab, CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155, CS/CNS/EE 156 a, CS 179.  9 units (one term) from the list: Ae/AM/CE/ME 214, Ae/AM/ ME 232 ab, Ay 199, Ch 121 ab, GE 263, Ph/CS  219 abc. All courses to be applied toward the CSE minor requirements must  be taken on a graded basis, and students must obtain a grade of B or higher in all courses. Courses that are used to satisfy the CSE minor  cannot be used to satisfy course requirements in the major options  unless absolutely required by the option. Courses taken as part of the  CSE minor are counted toward the total number of units required for  the completion of the Ph.D. degree.  CSE Minor AdministrationThe CSE minor is administered by an oversight committee consisting  of three faculty members reporting to the chair of the engineering and  applied science division. In consultation with their advisers and, if needed, with the CSE Oversight Committee, students formulate a pro -gram of approved courses individually tailored to each student™s back -ground and needs, with the objective that the student achieve a level  of competence in specific subjects relevant to CSE. Students must  petition the CSE Oversight Committee for approval of their program of  study. Upon completion of the program of study, the CSE Oversight  Committee will verify that the CSE minor requirements have been ful -filled.COMPUTER SCIENCE (CS)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Graduate study in computer science within the Computing &  Mathematical Sciences department is oriented principally toward Ph.D.  research. The Ph.D. program requires a minimum of three academic  years of residence; required coursework is generally completed within  the first two years. Students must maintain high academic standards  during their graduate residence. A student™s Ph.D. research must exhibit  originality in the formulation, analysis, and solution of a problem that is  significant to the field of study. The option representative and executive  officers are available to discuss concerns regarding academic progress. CS Master™s Degree  There is no terminal M.S. degree in Computer Science. In exceptional  circumstances (typically when a student leaves the Ph.D. program  without completing the degree), the option representative may approve  the awarding of a M.S. degree, if the course requirements have been  met and the student has passed the preliminary examination (both are  described below).CS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  Course requirementsStudents must complete a minimum of 135 units of courses numbered  Special Regulations410100 or greater, including research units (CS 280). Students should con -sult with their adviser to ensure balance in the selected courses.  The coursework must include: CMS 290 is required for all first year CS graduate students  during each term (fall/winter/spring). Advanced courses in computer science. Completion of a minimum of 54 units of CS courses numbered 100 or greater  in addition to units earned for reading, research, and inde -pendent projects. Up to 24 of the 54 units may be taken from  non-CS courses from CMS or ACM, including CMS/ACM/IDS  107, CMS/ACM/EE 122 and CMS 117, or other courses with approval from the option representative.  Units outside computer science. Completion of a minimum of  27 units outside computer science. Courses jointly listed with  computer science cannot be used to fulfill this requirement. Preliminary examinationToward the end of the first year, all incoming students must take a  preliminary examination administered by the faculty. Its purpose is to  ensure a solid and broad knowledge in computer science, and in the  event of a deficiency, to direct the students to necessary courses and  reading. CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy, a student must have completed the  required coursework, have passed the preliminary examination, have  entered upon a course of research approved by his or her thesis advis -er, and have passed a candidacy oral examination. The candidacy oral  examination is administered by a committee that consists of four facul -ty that is approved by the option representative. The chair of the com -mittee must be a Caltech professorial faculty member distinct from the  adviser. The examination ascertains the student™s breadth and depth of  preparation for research in the chosen area. The candidacy examination  should be taken within the first three years of graduate study. Advising and Thesis SupervisionIn order to facilitate close supervision and a highly research-orient -ed environment, each student is admitted directly to an adviser and  research group. A course of study is determined in consultation with  the adviser. Occasionally students will be admitted into more than one  group. Changes in affiliation may occur with the common consent of  the student and the new adviser.  Students meet regularly with their adviser throughout their time at  Caltech, and are encouraged to do the same with other members of  the faculty.  Thesis and Final ExaminationA final oral examination will be scheduled and given after the Ph.D. the-sis has been submitted for review to the student™s adviser and thesis  committee; the latter consists of at least four faculty approved by the  411option representative. The chair of the committee must be a Caltech  professorial faculty member distinct from the adviser. The thesis exam -ination is a defense of the thesis research and a test of the candidate™s  knowledge in his or her specialized fields.Subject Minor in Computer ScienceA subject minor is not required for the Ph.D. degree in computer sci -ence. However, students majoring in other fields may take a subject  minor in computer science, provided the program is supervised by a  computer science faculty adviser, is approved by the computer science  option representative, and consists of 45 units sufficiently removed  from the student™s major program of study. COMPUTING AND MATHEMATICAL SCIENCE (CMS) Aims and Scope of Graduate Program  Algorithmic thinking is emerging as a fundamental tool for all researchers,  not just computer scientists. Algorithmic thinking now drives disciplines  ranging from statistics and electrical engineering to biology and physics  to economics and the social sciences. Computing and Mathematical  Sciences (CMS) is an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program that trains students  to apply algorithmic thinking to problems across science and engineering.  Our research mission is to build the mathematical and algorithmic foun -dations required to move from data to information to action. Students will  study structures and mechanisms that store, process, and communicate  information and that make decisions based on this information. These  systems may be expressed in silicon and called computers, in lines of  code called programs, or in abstract notation called mathematics. They  may appear in economics as markets or social networks, as sequences of  amino acids in DNA, or in the organic structure of the human brain. CMS Master™s Degree Only students who expect to pursue the Ph.D. degree will be admitted  to the option. The master™s degree may be awarded in exception -al cases. The awarding of this degree requires fulfilling the Institute  requirements for a master™s degree, satisfying the core course require -ments, and receiving a recommendation for awarding of the degree  from the preliminary exam committee. CMS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  Institute requirements for the Ph.D. degree are described in the section  on degree requirements. Approximately two years of coursework are  required, and two or more years are usually needed for preparation of  the dissertation. CMS Admission to Candidacy To be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in computing  and mathematical sciences the student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements, do the following:  Special Regulations412Core requirementEach student will take six core CMS classes, three in applied mathematics  (ACM) and three in Computer Science (CS). In both fields, at least two of  the three classes will be taken the first year to prepare for the preliminary  examination, while the remaining classes will be completed by the end of  the student™s second year. The core CMS classes are CMS/ACM/IDS 107,  CMS/ACM/EE 122, CMS 117, CMS/CS/IDS 139, CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144,  CMS/CS/CNS/IDS 155. These classes must be taken for a grade.Depth requirement:  At least 27 units of courses in one particular subject  area will be completed for a grade. The plan for these 27 units must be  approved by the CMS option representative. Breadth requirement:  At least 27 units of advanced courses in math-ematics, engineering, science, or social science will be completed for a  grade. The plan for these 27 units must be approved by the CMS option  representative. Preliminary ExaminationAll students must pass a preliminary examination on material from two  CMS core classes in applied mathematics and two CMS core classes  in computer science. The examination is administered by a committee  consisting of at least three faculty selected by the CMS option repre -sentative. The exam will occur during the student™s first year. Candidacy ExaminationAll students must pass an oral candidacy examination to ascertain the  breadth and depth of preparation for research in the chosen field. The  examination will be administered by a committee that consists of at least  four faculty, that is approved by the CMS option representative, and that  satisfies Institute regulations. In particular, the chair of the candidacy com -mittee must a faculty member distinct from the student™s research adviser.  The examination will occur during the student™s first three years. CMS 290 is required for all CMS first-year graduate students during  each term (fall/winter/spring).Advising and Thesis Supervision Upon admission, each student will be assigned a primary adviser in the option. This adviser will be replaced by a research adviser (possibly the  same faculty member) once a direction of specialization is determined,  and not later than the beginning of the second year. After completion of  the candidacy exam, each student will form a thesis committee (possi-bly the same as the candidacy committee) that consists of at least four faculty, that is approved by the CMS option representative, and that  satisfies Institute regulations. In particular, the chair of the thesis com -mittee must be a faculty member distinct from the student's research  adviser. The thesis committee will meet as needed, but no less than  once a year, in order to advise the student. A final oral examination will be scheduled and given after the Ph.D. thesis has been submitted for review to the student™s adviser and thesis  committee. The thesis examination is a defense of the thesis research  and a test of the candidate™s knowledge in his or her specialized fields.  413Normally, the defense will consist of a one-hour public lecture followed  by an examination of the thesis by the thesis committee.CONTROL AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS (CDS)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The option in control and dynamical systems (CDS) is open to students  with an undergraduate degree in engineering, mathematics, or science.  The qualifications of each applicant will be considered individually, and,  after being enrolled, the student will arrange his or her program in con -sultation with a member of the faculty. In some cases the student may be  required to make up undergraduate deficiencies in engineering science  courses.  The CDS option, as part of the Computing and Mathematical Sciences  department, emphasizes the interdisciplinary nature of modern theory of  dynamical systems and control. The curriculum is designed to promote a  broad knowledge of mathematical and experimental techniques in dynam -ical systems theory and control. In addition to taking courses in the CDS  option, students must select a focus area (see below). CDS Master™s Degree  Students will be admitted to the option who expect to pursue the Ph.D. degree. The master™s degree may be awarded in exceptional cases.  The awarding of this degree requires fulfilling the Institute requirements  for a master™s degree, satisfying the focus requirements, and receiving  a recommendation for awarding of the degree from the candidacy oral  examination committee.CDS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  Institute requirements for the Ph.D. degree are described in the section  on degree requirements. Approximately two years of course work are  required, and two or more years are usually needed for preparation of  the dissertation. Admission to CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in control and  dynamical systems, the student must, in addition to meeting the general  Institute requirements, do the following:  Complete the following courses: CDS 131, CDS 232, and CDS 231  or CDS 233.  Complete the following CMS/ACM courses: CMS/ACM/IDS 107,  CMS/ACM/IDS 113, or CMS 117.Complete an additional 36 units in CDS or other advanced courses  in systems theory, dynamical systems, robotics, and/or applied  mathematics.Complete the focus requirement, consisting of at least 27 units in  a particular area outside of CDS. Courses taken to satisfy the  focus must represent a coherent program of advanced study  in the chosen area. Possible areas include biological systems,  Special Regulations414computer science, environmental science, fluid dynamics, infor -mation and communications, networking, robotics, and space  systems. The program of study must be approved by the stu -dent™s counseling committee and the option representative.  Preliminary examination. Toward the end of the first year, all incom -ing students must take a preliminary examination administered  by the faculty. Its purpose is to ensure a solid and broad knowl -edge in control and dynamical systems, and in the event of  a deficiency, to direct the students to necessary courses and  reading.  Prepare a research progress report.  Pass an oral examination on the major topic of the student™s  research. The oral examination is normally taken no later than  the end of the third year of graduate academic residence at the  Institute.  In addition, CMS 290 is required for all CDS first year graduate stu -dents during each term (fall/winter/spring). Advising and Thesis SupervisionUpon admission, each student is assigned an adviser in the option, who  will approve the initial course of study by the student. A preliminary exam  given during the first year of study will be used to evaluate the student™s  preparation for continued study.  The adviser will be replaced by a research adviser and a candidacy  committee when the direction of specialization is determined, not later  than the beginning of the second year. The candidacy exam is normally  taken during the third year of study. The candidacy committee will be the  judge of the completion of the engineering focus requirement, necessary  before advancement to candidacy. The student™s candidacy committee  may be reconstituted as the thesis committee after the candidacy exam  has been successfully completed.  At the early stages of thesis preparation, the student™s thesis committee  will meet as needed to advise the student of his or her progress and to  deal with any problems that might have arisen.  A final oral examination will be given after the thesis has been formal-ly completed. The thesis examination will be a defense of the doctoral  thesis and a test of the candidate™s knowledge in the specialized field of  research. Normally this defense will consist of a one-hour public lecture  followed by an examination of the thesis by the thesis committee.CDS Subject Minor A student majoring in another option at the Institute may elect a  subject minor in control and dynamical systems. The student must  obtain approval from the CDS faculty of a course of study containing  at least 54 units of courses that are required for the CDS Ph.D. (see  Advancement to Candidacy) or advanced courses with a CDS listing.415ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Award of the Bachelor of Science degree may be followed by graduate  study leading to the Master of Science degree in electrical engineering,  and the more advanced degrees of Electrical Engineer or Doctor of  Philosophy. Because admission to graduate studies in electrical engi -neering at Caltech is extremely competitive, the Admissions Committee  attempts to select those applicants it judges both best qualified and best suited for the graduate program. The Graduate Record  Examination (GRE) will not be required or considered for admission to  the Ph.D. or M.S. degree programs in Electrical Engineering. EE Master™s Degree Normally, the master™s degree in electrical engineering is completed in  one academic year. The principal criteria for evaluating applicants for the  MSEE are the excellence of their preparation for the math- and phys -ics-oriented nature of Caltech™s graduate courses, and the judgment of  the Admissions Committee on their ability to successfully pursue and  benefit from the course program. The Institute does not normally admit  an applicant to the master™s degree in a field in which the applicant  already has a master™s degree from another U.S. institution. Financial aid  is seldom offered to those who intend to complete their graduate work  with a master™s degree. A joint B.S./M.S. degree is not available in elec -trical engineering.135 units (100 or above) are required as approved by the electrical  engineering graduate student adviser. No more than 30 units of pass/fail  grades may be counted toward this requirement. Units toward this are  not transferable from other schools. At least 54 units of EE letter-graded  courses (courses listed or cross-listed as EE) labeled 100 or above and  not counting EE 291 are required. EE 105 abc, Electrical Engineering  Seminar, is also required. Students are urged to consider including a  humanities course in the remaining free electives. Students who have been admitted to the M.S.-only program must  reapply if they are interested in the Ph.D. program. EE Degree of Electrical Engineer  The engineer™s degree may be awarded in exceptional cases. The  awarding of this degree requires fulfilling the Institute requirements for  an engineer™s degree and receiving a recommendation for its awarding  from the candidacy oral examination committee. EE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  As a rule, applicants who wish to undertake research work leading to  a degree of Doctor of Philosophy in electrical engineering are admitted  initially only for the MSEE. They are, however, evaluated according to  additional criteria, the most important of which is the applicant™s inter -est in and potential for research in one of the areas described below.  The statement of purpose required as part of the application should  clearly address this match. Considerable weight is also given to the  Special Regulations416opinions expressed in the applicant™s letters of recommendation. During the Ph.D. applicant™s master™s degree year, evaluation con -tinues. It is based in part on performance in courses and in part on a one-hour oral presentation scheduled early in the second quarter. As  the year progresses, the electrical engineering faculty get to know the  student, and the student makes contact with the professor in his or  her area of research interest. Upon acceptance into a research group,  the student begins research work and defers receiving the master™s  degree until formal admission into the Ph.D. program. In the event  that the Adviser is not an EE faculty member, the student should meet  with the EE Option Representative and develop an oversight plan to  monitor progress. Before the end of his or her second academic year  of graduate study, the student normally takes the Ph.D. qualifying oral  examination. This must, however, be done no later than the end of the  third academic year. Ph.D. applicants who already hold a master™s degree in electrical  engineering from another U.S. institution may be admitted directly to  the Ph.D. program, but must provide sufficient information to obtain  advance acceptance into a research group. Financial aid available to a Ph.D. applicant includes teaching assis-tantships and fellowships. TA duties consist of grading papers or lab  instruction but not classroom lecturing. A fellowship may be supple -mented by a teaching assistantship, and either or both include a full tuition scholarship. Tuition scholarships alone are not available. If finan -cial aid is not requested, or if the box on the application form labeled  ﬁwilling to come without aid™™ is checked, information on the source of  funds for each year of intended graduate study must be included.CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the doctor™s degree, the appli -cant must satisfy the following requirements (and pass the Ph.D. quali -fying oral examination) no later than the end of the third academic year: Complete 18 units of research in his or her field of interest.  Obtain approval of a course of study consisting of at least 135  units of advanced courses in electrical engineering or the related subjects approved by the Ph.D. adviser, with at least  54 units of letter-graded EE courses numbered 100 or above  (not counting EE 291). Only up to 27 units in research (e.g.,  EE 291) may be counted in this total. No more than 30 units  of pass/fail grades may be counted toward this requirement.  The courses taken to satisfy the math requirement below  and courses taken to fulfill the Master of Science degree  requirement may be included to satisfy this requirement.  Units toward this requirement are not transferable from other  schools.Pass 27 units of mathematics courses, as approved by the stu -dent™s research adviser, with letter grade no lower than C.  Pass a qualifying oral examination covering broadly the major  field. Students are strongly encouraged to do this before the  end of the second year of residency. 417Ph.D. CommitteeThe Ph.D. qualifying oral exam and the final defense exam are conduct -ed by committees that are set up by the student and approved by the  option representative. Members of these Ph.D. committees also serve  as second or backup mentors in cases where such additional advising  and problem solving are appropriate. Thesis and Final ExaminationThe candidate is required to take a final oral examination covering the  doctoral thesis and its significance in and relation to his or her major  field. This final examination will be given no less than two weeks after the doctoral thesis has been presented in final form, and before its  approval. This examination must be taken at least four weeks before  the commencement at which the degree is to be granted. Advising and Thesis SupervisionPeriodic meetings between the advising faculty and the graduate student  are an integral part of the Ph.D. program. These meetings should be at  sufficiently frequent intervals, as determined by the student and adviser.  Students are also encouraged to meet with other members of the Ph.D.  committee, the option representative, the executive officer, or Caltech™s  ombudsperson to discuss problems relating to satisfactory progress. EE Subject MinorA student majoring in another option at the Institute may elect a subject minor in electrical engineering. The student must obtain approval from  the electrical engineering faculty of a course of study containing at least 45 units (over the 100 level) of advanced courses with an EE list-ing (excluding 291). At least 36 of these should be for letter grades no lower than C. Freshman classes cannot be counted toward this. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (ESE) Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The ESE graduate program trains doctoral students to solve fundamen -tal problems in environmental science and engineering. The problems  cut across traditional disciplinary boundaries and span space scales  ranging from global to local. Students are trained to acquire a broad  base of knowledge of environmental systems, including Earth™s atmo -sphere, oceans, and biosphere. They deepen their knowledge in one  or more focus areas, culminating in research leading to a Ph.D. thesis.  Reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of research in the ESE pro -gram, the program unites faculty from the divisions of Geological and  Planetary Sciences, Engineering and Applied Science, and Chemistry and Chemical Engineering.AdmissionApplicants for admission to the ESE program should have undergrad -uate preparation in science, engineering, or mathematics. Admission is  limited to students intending to pursue the Ph.D. degree. Only students  Special Regulations418who intend to work full-time toward the Ph.D. degree are admitted. The  application submission deadline is January 1. The admission process  follows Institute regulations. The GRE general test and subject tests are  not required. Self-reported scores will not be considered. International StudentsIn order to be admitted for graduate study, students from non-En -glish-speaking countries are expected to read, write, and speak English  and comprehend the spoken language. Although not required for  admission, for applicants whose native language is not English or have not received a degree from a university or college where English is the  primary language of instruction, it is important to demonstrate a strong  capability in English prior to admission to Caltech. This can be done by self-reporting scores from the Educational Testing Service (TOEFL),  Pearson Test of English Academic (PTE Academic), the Cambridge  Examinations and the International English Language Testing System  (IELTS), or other services that provide a certified English-language pro -ficiency examination. The ESE faculty may also arrange an online inter-view while assessing applications. AdvisingAn academic adviser is appointed for each incoming student to assist in designing his or her academic program. The research adviser is cho -sen by mutual agreement of the student and adviser during the second  year of graduate study, after passing the Ph.D. qualifying examination.  The Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC), consisting of four Caltech fac -ulty members including the research adviser, should be constituted  and meet with the student soon after the student passes the qualifying examination; thereafter, it should meet with the student annually to  review progress and provide guidance and support. Committee mem -bership may be changed if the student™s research interests change.  The TAC generally serves to recommend the student™s advancement to  candidacy; it may also serve as the examining committee for the final thesis defense.ESE Master™s Degree  Students enrolled in the Ph.D. program may be awarded a master™s  degree if they have satisfied the basic Institute requirement of 135  units of work in courses numbered 100 or higher. These courses must  include those specifically required in the ESE Ph.D. program. ESE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  For the Ph.D. degree, the student must (1) satisfy the course require -ments, (2) pass the qualifying examination, (3) advance to candidacy,  and (4) complete a thesis and successfully defend it in a final oral examination.Course RequirementsDuring their first year, students, in consultation with their academic  advisers, must design a program of graduate study that includes a min -419imum of 135 units of graduate work to be completed before the end of  their third year. The course program should take into account the stu -dents™ individual backgrounds and focus areas, educate them broadly  in fundamental questions and methods of contemporary environmental  science and engineering, and prepare them for their research. The course program must include the core courses ESE 101, 102,  and 103. Attendance at the weekly research seminars (ESE 104 and  110 abc) is required for first-year students and is expected of all gradu -ate students. All students are expected to have knowledge of methods  of applied mathematics and statistics on the level of courses such as Ge 108 and Ge/ESE 118. In cases of unusual preparation, students  may petition to substitute a similar but more advanced course for one  of the required courses. Additionally, students are required to take 36 units of elective cours -es from two of the three groups below:  Environmental Biology: ESE/Bi 166, ESE/Bi 168, Ge/ESE 170;  Environmental Chemistry: ESE/Ch 175, ESE/Ch 176, ESE/Ge/ Ch 171; Environmental Physics: ESE 130-138, Ge/ESE 139, Ge/ESE  150, ESE/ChE 158.The remaining units of graduate work can be fulfilled by a com -bination of elective courses in ESE or related disciplines, reading or  laboratory courses (ESE 100), and research (ESE 106, 300). Of the total  required 135 units, no more than 45 units may be in research. No more  than 27 research units may be taken during the first year of graduate  study. Exceptions may be granted by petition. It is expected that each graduate student will, as part of the Ph.D. graduation requirement, serve as a teaching assistant for one course  per year, following completion of the qualifying exam. Ph.D. Qualifying ExaminationThe Ph.D. qualifying examination must be taken during the first term of  the student™s second year of residency. This examination consists prin -cipally of an oral defense of two research propositions, each advised  by a different faculty member. Written abstracts must be submitted for  both propositions, and one of them must be described in the form of a  research report or proposal. The qualifying exam also covers the mate -rial of the ESE core courses and of the elective courses the student has  taken. In preparation for the qualifying examination, students are encour -aged to register for nine units of research (ESE 106) in their second and  third terms of residency. Advancement to CandidacyStudents are recommended to advance to candidacy following the  successful completion of a candidacy exam with their Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC). The exam, consisting of both a written Ph.D. thesis  proposal and an oral presentation of this plan is required, and must be  approved by all TAC members. Advancement to candidacy, including  all required course work, should be completed before the end of spring  term in the student™s third year of residency. Special Regulations420Thesis and Final ExaminationCopies of the completed thesis must be provided to the examining  committee two weeks before the final oral examination. The final  oral examination focuses on the work of the thesis and, according to  Institute regulations, must be held at least two weeks before the degree  is conferred. ESE Subject Minor Graduate students majoring in another option at the Institute may elect a subject minor in ESE. The ESE minor is intended to supplement one of Caltech™s graduate degrees and is designed for students who wish  to broaden and deepen their expertise with knowledge in ESE. To com -plete an ESE subject minor, graduate students must enroll in a program  of study approved by the ESE option representative, which is to include  at least 36 units over two or more terms of graduate-level ESE classes  (ESE 100 and above) and 18 units over two or more terms of research  under ESE 106 or ESE 300. At least one of the graduate-level ESE classes must be ESE 101, ESE 102, or ESE 103.GEOLOGICAL AND PLANETARY SCIENCES (GPS)  (Geology, Geobiology, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Planetary Science) Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Students in the Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences study the earth and planets to understand their origin, constitution, and develop-ment, and the effect of the resulting physical and chemical characteris -tics on the history of life, on the environment, and on humanity. Broad  training in the fundamental sciences enriched by more specialized  course work within the division forms the basis of the educational pro -gram. Students are encouraged to work with complex and often incom -plete data sets, to undertake research in natural settings such as in the  field or at sea, and to use the many modern laboratory facilities avail -able within the division. Programs of study and research are pursued  in environmental science and engineering, geobiology, geochemistry,  geology, geophysics, and planetary science. The curriculum is flexible  so that students with diverse degrees in science and engineering may  carry out graduate work within the division. Interdisciplinary studies are  encouraged and students may carry out academic and research pro -grams within and between different divisions. The objective is to train  students for future employment in academic research, government, and  industry. Admission and Entrance ProceduresOnly students who intend to work full-time toward the Doctor of  Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree are admitted. The application submission  deadline for the GPS Division is January 1. The admission process fol -lows Institute regulations. The GRE general test and subject tests are  not required for any of the GPS options. Self-reported scores will not  be considered. 421International StudentsIn order to be admitted for graduate study, students from non-En -glish-speaking countries are expected to read, write, and speak English  and comprehend the spoken language. Although not required for  admission, for applicants whose native language is not English or have not received a degree from a university or college where English is the  primary language of instruction, it is important to demonstrate a strong  capability in English prior to admission to Caltech. This can be done by self-reporting scores from the Educational Testing Service (TOEFL),  Pearson Test of English Academic (PTE Academic), the Cambridge  Examinations and the International English Language Testing System  (IELTS), or other services that provide a certified English-language  proficiency examination. The GPS faculty may also arrange an online  interview while assessing applications.Based on their applications and interests, students enter one of the  major subject options of the division and are given an academic advis -er who is a professorial faculty member associated with the option.  The six options are environmental science and engineering, geobiology,  geochemistry, geology, geophysics, and planetary science. Students  may later change options, but must first obtain approval from the new  option. Each student must plan to satisfy the requirements for the  Ph.D. degree in one option. Entering students in the week preceding the beginning of instruction  for the first term meet with their option representatives to discuss their  preparation in the basic sciences and select a series of courses that  will best prepare them for research in their chosen field while meeting  the requirements set forth below. First-year graduate students are encouraged to register for at least  nine units of research (Ge 297) in each term of residence. The primary  objective is to communicate to the students the excitement of discov-ery based on original investigations and to provide a broad scope of  research aims. An important byproduct can be the formulation of prop -ositions for the Ph.D. qualifying oral examination or orientation toward  Ph.D. research. Advising and Thesis SupervisionThe option representative for each incoming student will act as the aca -demic adviser in the first term. An academic adviser will be assigned by the start of second term. This appointed adviser will continue as men-tor with broad responsibility for a student™s academic welfare through -out the graduate program. During the second year, after passing the  qualifying examination, each student should identify a professor as  thesis adviser, who will normally provide a graduate research assistant -ship and the opportunity for continuing research. In consultation with  the two faculty advisers, each student then forms a Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC), composed of at least four Caltech professors  (chaired by the academic adviser). External scientists closely involved  in the student™s research may also be appointed. Members of the TAC  serve as advisers, counselors, and resources, and its membership may  be changed if a student™s research interests change. Special Regulations422The TAC meets with the student at least once each year for a prog -ress review, and informally whenever the student needs or requests  assistance or guidance. In addition, the faculty members in each option have their own systems for annual evaluations of student progress.  A few months before completion of the thesis dissertation, the thesis  examining committee will be chosen, usually including the members of the Thesis Advisory Committee.All students are urged to consult with division faculty in the following  sequence if they have any problems: thesis and academic advisers,  Thesis Advisory Committee, option representative, academic officer,  and division chair. If these division personnel cannot resolve a problem,  then the student should turn to Institute offices. GPS Master™s Degree  Students enrolled in the Ph.D. program may be awarded a master™s  degree when they have satisfied the basic Institute requirement of  135 units. These courses must be part of a plan of study approved by  the option representative, numbered 100 or higher, and part of those  used to satisfy the Ph.D. requirement in one of the options of the divi -sion. A minimum of 72 units should be taken as courses, rather than  research or independent study units. Specifically required are two  courses from the list Ge 101, Ge 102, Ge 103, Ge 104, or ESE 101,  ESE 102, ESE 103.An application for admission to candidacy for an M.S. degree must  be submitted in REGIS according to the academic calendar in the  Caltech Catalog (see pages 4Œ5).GPS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy Division RequirementsFor a Ph.D. degree, the student must 1) pass the qualifying oral exam -ination, 2) satisfy course requirements of the division and of an option,  and 3) complete a thesis and successfully defend it in a final oral exam-ination. Recommendation to the dean of graduate studies for admis-sion to candidacy occurs after the student has satisfied the first two requirements and has been accepted for thesis research by a division  faculty member, who then becomes the student™s thesis adviser. The qualifying examination consists of oral and written defense of two  research propositions, supplemented by a written description of one of  them. Students are encouraged to consult with various faculty members  concerning their ideas on propositions, but the material submitted must  represent the work of the student. There must be a different faculty mem -ber associated with each of the two propositions. The exam is normally  taken early in the first term of the second year of residence and is admin -istered by the qualifying examination committee, which has members from  the six options of the division. A more detailed outline of the qualifying  examination is available on the division website.By the end of the fall term of the second year, students are expect -ed to select a thesis adviser(s) and before the end of the second year,  the Thesis Advisory Committee will be selected, as outlined above. The division encourages students to engage in research early in their  graduate careers. Students making normal progress will submit papers  423to refereed journals that have been approved by a faculty member of  the division. The final oral examination for the doctorate by the thesis examining committee will be scheduled no sooner than two weeks fol-lowing submission of the thesis (approved by the thesis adviser) and, in  conformity with Institute regulations, it must be scheduled at least two  weeks before the degree is to be conferred. Candidates are expected to publish the major results of their the -sis work. The published papers should have a California Institute of  Technology address. Published papers may be included in the thesis. By the end of the first academic year (third term): submission by the  student of (1) tentative titles of propositions for review by the qualifying  examination committee and (2) a list of courses planned to satisfy the Ph.D. requirement, for review by the option. By the end of the second academic year: (1) passage of oral exam; (2) approval by the option of courses planned to satisfy candidacy  requirements; (3) submission of a tentative thesis topic and adviser, and  Thesis Advisory Committee.By the end of the third academic year: (1) satisfactory completion of  course requirements; (2) satisfactory completion of other requirements  including selection of thesis topic and adviser, and Thesis Advisory  Committee; (3) admission to candidacy. A student who has not been  admitted to candidacy by the end of the third year will need permission  of the academic officer to register. By the end of the fourth academic year: satisfactory progress toward  completion of thesis.After completing the fifth academic year, the student must formally  petition to register for each subsequent year. Financial aid will normally  not be extended beyond the sixth year. The student™s program and progress will be reviewed annually by his  or her option and by the Thesis Advisory Committee. In cases where,  in the opinion of the faculty in the option, the student is clearly not showing adequate progress, they may recommend to the division chair  that the student be denied permission to continue in the Ph.D. program  based upon their overall assessment of the student™s performance. Basic Division Course RequirementDuring the first year, every graduate student will take two of the seven  basic introductory courses Ge 101Œ104 and ESE 101Œ103, in areas in  which the student has not had substantial training. These should be completed during the first year. Throughout their graduate careers,  students are expected to attend departmental seminars and seminar  courses led by visiting scientists. Beginning in the second academic year, students are required to  serve as teaching assistants for one quarter per year they are in resi -dence.GPS Requirements of the Major Subject Options  GeobiologyIn addition to the general Institute and basic division requirements, can -didates for the Ph.D. degree in geobiology must successfully complete a  minimum of 90 units at the 100 or greater level, including Ge 104; either  Special Regulations424Bi/Ch 110, Bi/CNS/NB 195, or Ge/ESE 118; and two courses from each  of the following three subject menus:   Geology: Ge 106, 112, 114 ab, 124 ab, Ge 125. Chemistry: Ge/ESE 143, 149, Ge 140 ab, ESE/Ge/Ch 171, 172, ESE/Ch 175, 176.  Biology: ESE/Bi 166, 168, Ge/ESE/Bi 178, Bi 117, ESE 103. Other classes may be substituted for these menu requirements with  the approval of the option representative. A student with substantial  prior experience in geobiology (e.g., an M.S. degree) may use prior  course work to substitute up to 45 of these units with the approval of  the geobiology option representative. All students must have a basic  knowledge of organic chemistry at the level of Ch 41 a. This require -ment may be met by previous course work or through successful  completion of this class. Geobiology students must complete one term (6 units) of Ge 109 (Oral Presentation) as an independent study with a  faculty member of their choosing, typically the thesis adviser.   GeochemistryIn addition to general Institute and basic division requirements, candidates  for the Ph.D. degree in geochemistry are required to take one term of Ge  109 in the geochemistry option and are required to demonstrate an under -standing of the field through a total of 90 units of course work at the 100  level or higher spread over four of the subdisciplines offered in the option:  petrology/mineralogy, isotope geochemistry, cosmochemistry, water  chemistry/oceans, atmospheres, biogeochemistry, or advanced chemis -try. All students must have a basic knowledge of chemistry at the level of  Ch 21 and mathematics at the level of Ge 108. If appropriate, Ch 21 abc  may be included as part of these units, and other courses below the 100  level may be included at the discretion of the option representative. With  the approval of the geochemistry option representative, a student with  substantial prior experience in some of the subdisciplines may use prior  course work to substitute for up to 45 of these units and students entering  with a master™s degree in science or mathematics may be exempt from  up to 45 units. In the oral candidacy exam, the student will be subject to  examination in all four of the chosen subdisciplines.  GeologyThe geology option requirements are (1) two of Ge 102, 103, 104, or ESE  101, ESE 102, ESE 103, which also satisfy the basic division require -ment; (2) 36 units of advanced field geology, in the form of three terms  of Ge 121 abc taken from three different instructors; (3) 54 additional  units in 100- or 200-level science, math or engineering courses in any  field at Caltech. Ch 21 abc may be included as part of these units, and  other courses below the 100 level may be included at the discretion of  the option representative. Courses that cannot be used to satisfy these  requirements include research and reading courses, and certain courses  constituting basic preparation in the field of geology, such as Ge 106,  Ge 112, Ge 114 ab, and Ge 115 ab. A grade of C or better is required  for all course work that satisfies these requirements. Knowledge of basic  physics, mathematics, and data analysis at the level of Ge 108 and Ge/ESE 118 is required of all Ph.D. candidates in geology. Students entering  425the geology option with a master™s degree in a science or mathematics  may be exempt from up to 45 units at the discretion of the option repre -sentative. Geology students are required to give a 30-minute presentation,  including 10 minutes of discussion, on their research at the Geoclub  Seminar series before admission to candidacy. GeophysicsIn addition to general Institute requirements, candidates for the Ph.D  degree in geophysics must successfully complete the following: (1) two  of the following basic introductory courses: Ge 101, 103, 104, or ESE  101Œ103, and one term of Ge 109 per year from the second year until  the last year prior to obtaining the degree; (2) either Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab,  APh 105 ab, MS 115, or a subject equivalent; (3) three of Ge 161, Ge  162, Ge 163, or Ge 164; (4) Ge 111 ab; (5) the choice between five addi-tional 100- or 200-level science or mathematics courses or a minor in  any field at Caltech (for example, computational science and engineer-ing). It is highly recommended that (1)-(4) be fulfilled in the first year and  (5) in the second year. A grade of C or better is required for all course  work that satisfies these requirements. Knowledge of basic physics,  mathematics, and data analysis at the level of Ge 108 and Ge/ESE 118  is required of all Ph.D. candidates in geophysics. This requirement may  be met by previous course work or through successful completion of  these classes. Students may substitute another course for a required  course if they can demonstrate to an option representative that they  have already had the material in the required course.  Planetary ScienceIn addition to general Institute and basic division requirements, can -didates for the Ph.D. degree in planetary science must satisfy the fol -lowing course requirements: Ge 101, Ge 102, and courses in planetary  formation and dynamics (Ge/Ay 133), planetary atmospheres (Ge/ESE  150), planetary interiors (Ge 131), and planetary surfaces (Ge 151). In addition, students shall successfully complete 45 units of 100-level or higher courses in a coherent field of specialization. This requirement  may be satisfied by completion of a subject minor or through a set  of courses chosen in consultation with and approved by the adviser  and the option representative. All candidates are expected to possess  knowledge of physics and mathematics at the level of Ge 108. This requirement may be met by previous coursework or through successful  completion of this class. Higher-level mathematics and physics courses  are strongly encouraged. All candidates are expected to attend the  planetary sciences seminar regularly. Satisfaction of the oral presenta -tion requirement includes at least one 30-minute presentation annually  by the student in the planetary sciences seminar, starting in the second  year. Typically, students will present on their research work each year. GPS Subject MinorA student may, with the approval of the Division of Geological and  Planetary Sciences, elect a minor in any one of the major subjects listed  above. Such a subject minor will include at least 45 units in courses at the  Special Regulations426100 level or higher. Normally, a member of the division faculty affiliated  with the minor will participate in the student™s oral thesis defense. HISTORY (H) The program for a subject minor in history must be approved by the  executive officer for the humanities before the admission to candida -cy. In addition to meeting general Institute requirements, the student  must complete satisfactorily, with a grade of C or better, 45 units in  advanced courses in history. HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE (HPS) Graduate students in science, mathematics, or engineering may take a minor in history and philosophy of science (HPS). The graduate minor is devoted to the study of the historical evolution and philosophical underpinnings of the physical and biological sciences. Historical work in the minor includes the origins of experimental practice, the social and institutional contexts of science, the origins and applications of quantitative methods, specific developments since antiquity in physics, biology, and chemistry, as well as biographical and comparative stud -ies. Philosophical research deals with issues in causation, explanation,  scientific inference, the foundations of probability and decision theory,  philosophy of mind and psychology, philosophy of neuroscience, and  scientific fraud and misconduct.The minor thus fosters the acquisition of broad knowledge about  the scientific enterprise and related foundational problems, as well as  more detailed analysis of the progress of and philosophical problems  in particular branches of science. It is a valuable supplement to a tech-nical degree since it helps equip students to understand the nature of  scientific progress and to grapple with the conceptual basis of science  and its wider ramifications. Students who successfully complete the HPS minor will be recognized with official credit for the achievement on  their transcripts.RequirementsGraduate students who take an HPS minor are expected to complete  Hum/H/HPS 10, HPS 102 ab, HPS/Pl 120, at least three units of HPS  103, and 18 units of additional work in HPS, to be completed by taking courses in HPS/H or HPS/Pl numbered 99 or higher. Students need not  complete the requirements for the minor within the first two years of  graduate study. INFORMATION AND DATA SCIENCE (IDS) IDS Subject MinorA subject minor in Information and Data Science (IDS) may be elected  by graduate students who are pursuing PhD degrees in any option.  The IDS graduate minor is designed for students who wish to broad -427en their expertise and get a solid background in the following areas:  Mathematics of Data Science, Machine Learning, Statistical Data Analysis, and Information Theory. To receive the IDS graduate minor, students must satisfy the following  requirements:1.  Linear Algebra: ACM/IDS 104 or CMS/ACM/IDS 1072.  Probability: ACM/EE/IDS 116 or CMS 117 3.  Statistics: IDS/ACM/CS 157 or ACM 1184.  Machine Learning: CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155 or CS/CNS/EE  156a5.  One course from the following list: Hum/Pl 45, CMS/ACM/EE  122, Ma/ACM/IDS 140 ab, CS/IDS 150 ab, ACM/EE/IDS 170, ACM/IDS 216, ACM/EE/IDS 217, Ec/ACM/CS 112, IDS/Ec/PS 126, ACM/IDS 154, IDS/ACM/CS 158, CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159, CS 163, CS/CNS/EE/IDS 165, CS/IDS 121, EE/Ma/CS 126 ab, EE/Ma/CS/IDS 136, CMS/CS/IDS 139, CS/IDS 142, CS/EE/IDS 143, CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144, EE/CS/IDS 160, EE/CS 161, CS/IDS 162, CS/EE/IDS 166, EE/CS/IDS 167, CS/IDS 178.Note that all these courses have prerequisites that the student may  need to take, depending on the student™s background. The prerequi -sites can be satisfied with equivalent courses with approval from the  instructor. All courses used for fulfilling the IDS graduate minor requirements  must be taken on a graded basis and students must obtain a grade of B or higher on all courses. Courses that are used to satisfy the minor  requirements cannot be used to satisfy the requirements in the major  options.MATERIALS SCIENCE (MS) Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program The graduate program is designed to give students an understanding  of general phenomena in synthesisŒstructureŒproperty relationships in  all materials, plus a detailed understanding of phenomena for at least one broad class of materials such as: physical materials science (solid  state physics, quantum mechanics); mechanical materials science (micromechanics, continuum mechanics); soft materials (polymer chem -istry/physics, chemical bonding); or oxide materials science (mineralo-gy/mineral physics). After completing the Ph.D. program, students have  pursued careers in teaching and research at colleges and universities,  in research for government and industry, in the operation and control of  manufacturing processes, and in management and development posi -tions in the materials industry.  Students may enter the graduate program in materials science with  undergraduate preparation in physics, chemistry, engineering, or mate -rials science. Students interested in terminating their graduate study at  the master™s level are not normally admitted. Students in the Ph.D.  Special Regulations428program are required to complete a set of core courses, pass an  oral candidacy examination, complete a thesis describing original  research in materials science or a related field, and publicly defend  their thesis work.MS Preparation for the Graduate Program Students who have not specialized in materials science as undergrad -uates, as well as those who have, may be admitted for graduate study.  As preparation for advanced study and research, entering graduate  students are expected to have a thorough background in undergradu -ate mathematics, physics, and engineering. An outstanding four-year  undergraduate program in mathematics and sciences is also a suitable  background. The qualifications of each applicant will be considered  individually, and, after being enrolled, the student will arrange their  course of study and research in consultation with members of the fac -ulty and the materials science option representative. MS Master™s Degree The degree of Master of Science in materials science is only awarded to  students who do not already have an M.S. degree in Materials Science.  The degree will be awarded upon request by students who have fulfilled  the requirements. Only in exceptional cases is there admission to the  M.S. program as the final degree objective.  Each student is assigned to a member of the faculty who will serve as the student™s adviser. The adviser and option representative for  materials science will approve the student™s course of study. Study  for the degree of Master of Science in materials science will ordinarily  require at least three terms of courses. The courses shall be chosen  from the list of core courses below, although 27 units of research (MS  200 or equivalent) may be substituted for 27 units of lecture or labo -ratory courses. Completion of 137 units of these courses within two years with no grade less than a C constitutes the academic require -ments for the M.S. degree. Core Courses1. MS 131, MS 132, MS 133.2. APh/MS 105abc, or ChE/Ch 165 and ChE/Ch 164 and    APhMS 105c, or Ae/ME 118 and ChE/Ch 164 and APh/   MS 105c. 3. Two quarters of courses focused on specific materials,  such as APh 114 ab; Ch 120 a; Ch 121 ab; Ch/ChE 147, ChE/Ch 148; Ge 114, Ge 214, or ME/MS/Ae/AM 224. 4. Two quarters of courses focused on internal interactions in  materials, such as Ph 125 ab, Ch 125 ab or Ae/Ge/ME 160ab.5. 18 units of courses comprising either the third terms of  the sequences taken in 3 and 4 above, or other courses appropriate for the student™s research interests, such as MS/ME/ MedE 116, MS 121, MS/APh 122, MS 125, MS 141, MS 142, MS/ME 161, MS/APh 162, MS/ME 166, MS/APh 171, Ae/AM/MS/ME 213, MS/APh 256, ME/MS 2606.  Mathematics at the level expected of research in the student™s  429field. This may be satisfied by the courses ACM/IDS 104 and ACM 100ab, or ACM/IDS 101ab, or ACM/EE 106ab, or Ph 129ab. MS 141 can substitute for ACM/EE 106b or Ph 129c. Other variations may be possible at discretion of option repre -sentative. 7.  MS 110 (2 units) or APh 110 (4 units).  MS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy The doctoral program in materials science consists of a series of pre -paratory classes, followed by an oral candidacy exam, a written thesis,  and a final oral thesis defense. The goals of this program are to develop  excellence in a chosen field of specialization; to develop tools with which  to assess problems outside the student™s field of specialization; to devel -op sufficient strength in the physical sciences for self-education beyond  formal training; and to cultivate the motivation and foresight to become  a productive and influential leader. As such, the graduate program in  materials science is designed to be a doctoral program and students are  only admitted into the doctoral program. There is no separate master™s  program in materials science. The Ph.D. degree in materials science is focused on research. Study  and research programs for the Ph.D. degree are individually planned to fit  the interests and background of the student. A comprehensive research  project resulting in an original contribution to the field documented by a  dissertation is required. ResidencyA minimum of three academic years in residence as a graduate student  are required by the Institute, and two or more additional years are usu -ally needed for preparation of the thesis. Language RequirementThere is no language requirement for the Ph.D. degree. MinorNo minor is required for the Ph.D. degree. Students are, however,  encouraged to take advanced courses appropriate to their particular  interests. Advising and Thesis SupervisionAn interim adviser is appointed for each student upon admission  to a graduate degree in materials science (typically the materials  science option representative). The interim adviser will serve as the  primary mentor until the student finds a research adviser. In the  first year (no later than the third term), each student must choose a  research adviser who will have primary responsibility for supervising  the student™s course program and research. The important adviserŒ advisee relationship requires effort from both parties, and some gen -eral expectations are outlined earlier in this section of the catalog.  In consultation with their research adviser, the student should then  form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory Committee. This four-member com -mittee should include: (i) the student™s adviser, and (ii) at least three  Special Regulations430members of the Caltech professorial faculty. The research adviser  and the Thesis Advisory Committee provide the majority of mentor -ing to the student, offering advice on research, progress toward the  Ph.D., future careers, and other aspects of life in graduate school  and as a professional scientist. Requirements for Candidacy for the Ph.D. DegreeTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in Materials  Science, the student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements, do the following: a.  Courses. To continue in the graduate program, the student  must maintain a BŒ average for each term. Advancement to  candidacy requires the successful completion of the pro -gram listed under ﬁCore Coursesﬂ above. Alternatively, if the  student has taken equivalent courses elsewhere, they may  prove competency to the instructor of the equivalent course  at the Institute and request a waiver of the required course.  With the Core Course requirements 1-7, students must com -plete a minimum of 137 units of courses, numbered 100 or  above, before presenting themselves for Ph.D. candidacy. The  coursework towards the Ph.D. degree in materials science is  typically completed within the first two years of residency at  Caltech.    except for courses taken on a pass/fail basis.     ~ Students entering the program with advanced   preparation may choose either to substitute more   advanced courses in the topical areas shown or   demonstrate competency to the course instructor.   ~ Students may petition the materials science option  representative to accept alternative subjects or areas,   but such petitions must be submitted before the student   registers for the courses.  b.  Oral Candidacy Examination. This examination should be  taken no later than the end of the student™s second year of  residence. The student™s research adviser must be on the  examining committee, but cannot serve as chair of the com-mittee. The examination is based on the student™s course -work, and how it is related to the student™s planned research  area. The student will be expected to deliver a half-hour oral  presentation describing research to-date and will answer  questions related to this work. This portion of the examina -tion will be followed by more open-ended questions to test  general proficiency in materials science. Students who fail the  oral examination on their first attempt will be given addition-al guidelines for further study and an opportunity to retake  the examination a second and final time if the committee so  431recommends. Students who fail the oral examination a sec -ond time cannot continue with doctoral studies leading to  the Ph.D. Upon recommendation of the examining commit -tee, however, a student may be granted a terminal master™s  degree. The approval of the materials science option repre -sentative is necessary for registration beyond the third year  of graduate residence without successfully completing the  candidacy exam.c.  Research Competence. The student must have a doctoral  research adviser, and must have completed at least 18 units  of MS 200. Students who fulfill the requirements above will be  recommended for candidacy to the doctoral program and a  master™s degree (if applicable) in materials science.  Ph.D. Thesis RequirementsThe candidate is to provide a draft copy of the completed thesis  to the members of the examining committee (typically the same as  the Thesis Advisory Committee) at least two weeks before the final  oral examination. The date of the examination and the composition  of the examining committee will not be approved by the dean of  graduate studies until the thesis is submitted in completed form, i.e.,  ready for review by the dean, the members of the thesis committee,  and the Graduate Office proofreader. Registration is required for the  term in which the thesis defense is undertaken, but is not normally  allowed beyond the last date of the term. For more information,  please see the section entitled ﬁInformation for Graduate Studentsﬂ  in the Caltech Catalog.Ph.D. Final ExaminationThe candidate is required to take a final oral examination covering  the doctoral thesis and its significance in and relation to materials  science. It will consist of a public thesis seminar and an associated  oral examination on the thesis and related fields. The examining  committee must consist of the student™s adviser and three members  of the Caltech professorial faculty. The chair of the examining com -mittee must be a Caltech professorial faculty member distinct from  the adviser. This examination will be held at least two weeks after  the doctoral thesis has been presented in its final form, and prior to  its approval. Registration beyond the Sixth Year of Graduate Residence The annual approval of the student™s Thesis Advisory Committee and  option representative is necessary for registration beyond the eigh -teenth academic term of graduate residence at Caltech. MS Subject MinorGraduate students majoring in another option at the Institute may  elect a subject minor in materials science. They must obtain approval  from the materials science option representative for a course of study  containing at least 45 units of advanced courses with a grade of C or  Special Regulations432higher. Normally a member of the materials science faculty will partici -pate in the candidacy examination in the student™s major department.   fulfillment of this requirement.   the option representative in materials science, who will review  and approve the proposed course of study.   courses spanning different subfields of materials science. MATHEMATICS (M a)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program The principal aim of the graduate program is to develop the student™s  ability to do original research in mathematics. Independent and critical  thinking is fostered by direct contact with faculty members. (An indication  of the current research interests of the faculty begins on page 168.) Faculty  advisers help students plan their programs of study leading to a Ph.D. in  mathematics. Entering students are advised by the graduate option repre -sentative, who assists them in selecting appropriate courses, depending  upon their previous studies.  Ma Master™s Degree Entering graduate students are admitted directly to the Ph.D. program,  since the Institute does not offer a regular program in mathematics leading  to the master™s degree. A master™s degree may be awarded in exception -al circumstances either as a terminal degree or preliminary to the Ph.D.  Sufficiently advanced undergraduates may be admitted to graduate  standing to pursue a master™s degree simultaneously with the bachelor™s  program. The recipient of a master™s degree will be expected to take 135 units  in advanced mathematics (numbered 110 and higher). Unless the student  has placed out of some of them, these must include Math 110, 120, and  151 (the basic courses in analysis, algebra, and geometry) and at least  two terms of discrete mathematics. Reading and/or research courses may  only be included in this 135 units if approved by the executive officer for  mathematics.The general Institute requirements specify that the recipient of a mas -ter™s degree must have taken at least 135 units of graduate work as a  graduate student at the Institute, including at least 81 units of advanced  graduate work in mathematics. This advanced work is interpreted as work  with a course number greater than 109 and may include a master™s thesis. Ma Degree of Doctor of Philosophy   Course ProgramThe graduate courses are listed in section five. The three core course  seriesŠMa 110 abc in analysis, Ma 120 abc in algebra, and Ma 151 433abc in geometry and topologyŠare required of all graduate students.  Students are expected to complete each of the core course series  during the first year of study, unless they complete the correspond -ing qualifying exam upon entrance to the program (see section on  qualifying exams). In addition, students are required to complete nine  quarters of other advanced mathematics courses Ma 111 and above, at least two of which are in discrete mathematics: combinatorics,  complexity, and computability, or logic and set theory. Unless these  nine course quarters are given pass/fail only, they must be taken for  grades. Reading and research do not normally qualify to meet these  requirements. Under special circumstances (e.g., finishing the degree in  three years), exceptions to these requirements may be considered by  the graduate option representative. Beginning no later than the second  year, students will be expected to begin independent research work  and will be strongly encouraged to participate in seminars. Qualifying Examinations geometry/topologyŠemphasize mastery of the basic concepts and theorems and the ability to apply them to specific cases. Students are  required to take and pass two of the three examinations, and for the  third not taken, students must earn a B or better in all three terms of  the corresponding course series. The exams are offered at the begin -ning of the Fall term and end of the spring term each academic year,  with exceptional offerings made at other times of the year if needed  and approved by the graduate option representative. The examinations  must be attempted by the end of the spring term during the first year of study, and completed by the end of the first academic year. Entering  students are permitted to take one or more qualifying examinations at  the beginning of the fall term of their first academic year. If completed  successfully, the student may drop the corresponding core course and  will be excused from the remainder of the corresponding core require -ment. Special exceptions or extensions to the qualifying examination timeline may be considered by the graduate option representative with  support from the primary research adviser. Teaching Requirements Teaching is an integral part of the mathematics graduate education.  It is expected that students serve as teaching assistants in each term courses are offered unless alternative arrangements have been made  with the option and approved by the executive officer. Summer StudyAlthough there are no courses given in the summer, graduate students  are expected to carry out studies and research in their chosen area of  mathematics. In the summer after the first year, they will work under the  guidance of a faculty member to investigate a possible area for their  thesis research.  Special Regulations434Thesis Advising and Tracking Committee It is expected that by the fall quarter of the second year, students will  find a member of the faculty who agrees to serve as their thesis advis -er. The formal change of adviser process should be complete by the  end of the second academic year. The progress of all continuing students is assessed by the faculty  each fall, and students will consult with their advisers about their prog -ress and planning of their studies and research. Students receive help  and advice not only from their thesis adviser and other faculty mentors,  but also whenever needed from the graduate option representative and the  executive officer. (See also the section with guidelines for graduate student  advising.) In addition to the primary thesis adviser, each student will  have a candidacy committee, Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC), and  final defense committee. In most cases, the members of all of these committees are the same, but the student has the right to change  the members. The student in consultation with his or her adviser will arrange the formation of the committee, which will have at least four members and meet the requirements listed in the subsection Graduate  Policies and Procedure entitled ‚Degree of Doctor of Philosophy.™ At  least two of the committee members should be members of the math-ematics professorial faculty and the chair of the committees must be a  professorial faculty who is not the primary research adviser. Admission to CandidacyBefore the end of their third year, students are expected to finish the  process of applying for admission to candidacy for the Ph.D. degree.  This formal step requires completion of the qualifying examinations,  core courses, and advanced courses, as well as a satisfactory oral  presentation to a committee of faculty members. The presentation  will describe both the general area of the student™s proposed thesis  research and the specific problem or problems to be addressed. The  candidacy meeting should be complete by the beginning of the fourth year of study. It normally takes place during the spring term of the  third year. In some cases, during the summer term of the third year,  but scheduling must be done by the end of the spring term. Special exceptions or extensions to the admission to candidacy timeline may be considered by the graduate option representative with support from  the primary research adviser. Thesis Advisory Committee MeetingsThe Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC) will track the student™s prog -ress through annual meetings between the candidacy exam and final  defense. It is the responsibility of the student to convene the TAC  during the fourth and fifth year of study. The fourth-year meeting should  take place no later than the end of the winter term of the fourth year.  The fifth-year meeting should take place no later than the end of the fall term of the fifth year. Thesis and Final Examination  At least two weeks prior to the final thesis defense, candidates for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy must deliver copies of their theses  435to their advisers, to the Graduate Office, and to the members of the  committee that will conduct the final oral examination on the thesis. The examination must be held at least three weeks before the date on  which the degree will be conferred and at least two weeks after the  delivery of the copies of the thesis.Ma Subject MinorStudents majoring in other fields may take a subject minor in math-ematics. Minor programs must include 54 units of advanced work  approved by a representative of the mathematics department, who will  ensure that the work represents a concentrated study in one or more of  the main fields of mathematics. A special oral examination in the sub-ject minor will be given soon after completion of the minor program. MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (ME)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  Mechanical engineering (ME) research and study are offered through  the Department of Mechanical and Civil Engineering (MCE). The degrees of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) and Master of Science (M.S.)  are offered. In general, students who intend to work full-time toward the  Ph.D. degree as a final degree objective are admitted to the Mechanical  Engineering Graduate Program. The M.S. degree is typically only  awarded to students who pursue the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engi -neering at Caltech and who do not already have an M.S. degree in  mechanical engineering.The aim of the graduate program in mechanical engineering at  Caltech is to prepare students for research and professional practice in  an era of rapidly advancing interdisciplinary technology. The program  combines individual depth of experience and competence in a particu-lar chosen major specialty, with a strong background in the basic and  engineering sciences. It strives to develop professional independence,  creativity, leadership, and the capacity for continuing professional and  intellectual growth. ME Preparation for the Graduate Program Entering graduate students are expected to have a thorough back -ground in undergraduate mathematics, physics, and engineering. While  a strong undergraduate program in mechanical engineering should  provide a suitable preparation, students who have not specialized in  mechanical engineering as undergraduates may also be admitted for  graduate study. For example, an outstanding four-year undergraduate  program in mathematics and sciences may provide a suitable back -ground as well. The qualifications of each applicant will be considered  individually, and, after being enrolled, the student will arrange his or her  program in consultation with a member of the faculty. Special Regulations436ME Master™s Degree  The degree of Master of Science in mechanical engineering is only  awarded to students who do not already have a M.S. degree in  mechanical engineering. The degree will be awarded upon request by  students who have fulfilled the requirements. Only in exceptional cases  is there admission to the M.S. program as the final degree objective. A minimum of 138 units of courses numbered 100 or above, which  meet the required master™s program listed below, must be passed with a  grade of at least C for completion of the master™s degree in mechanical  engineering. All units must be taken for grades, except for courses offered  only on a pass/fail basis. The M.S. degree in mechanical engineering is  typically completed within the first two years of residency at Caltech. Each student™s program must be approved by the adviser and  option representative in mechanical and civil engineering before regis -tering for the course. Required Master™s Program a)  Graduate mechanical engineering core (54 units). These   units should provide a solid base for the student™s  engineering interest. The courses should be selected from     the Core ME subjects listed under the Degree of Doctor  of Philosophy Description and Requirements section. b)  Mathematics, engineering, and research electives (54  units). Courses may be taken in Ae, AM, ACM, ME, MedE, MS, EE, ESE, APh, CDS, CS, ChE, and CNS, except seminar courses. Students are encouraged to take research units, ME  300, up to a maximum of 27.c)  Free electives (27 units). Any course with a number of 100  or greater may be selected, except that research units and semi -nar courses can not be included.   d)  Graduate Engineering Seminar, AM/CE/ME 150 abc      (3 units). ME Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  The Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering is focused on research.  Study and research programs for the Ph.D. degree are individually  planned to fit the interests and background of the student. A com -prehensive research project resulting in an original contribution to the  field documented by a dissertation is required. A minimum of three  academic years in residence as a graduate student are required by  the Institute, and two or more additional years are usually needed for  preparation of the thesis. Advising and Thesis SupervisionAn interim adviser is appointed for each student upon admission to a graduate degree in mechanical engineering. The interim adviser will  serve as the primary mentor until the student finds a research adviser.  It is the responsibility of the student to find an academic and research  adviser within three terms of graduate residence at Caltech. In consul -tation with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  437Committee within four terms of graduate residence at Caltech. This  committee shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech pro -fessorial faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in mechan -ical and civil engineering. The committee shall meet as requested by  the student. Further, the committee shall meet annually to review prog -ress and to approve the registration of the student beyond the fifth year  of graduate residence at Caltech. The adviser and the Thesis Advisory Committee provide the majority  of mentoring to the student. In addition, the option representative and  other members of the faculty are always available to provide advice  and mentoring on any aspect of research, progress toward the Ph.D.,  future careers, and other aspects of life in graduate school and as a  professional scientist. Admission to CandidacyTo be recommended for candidacy for the Ph.D. degree in mechani -cal engineering, the student must, in addition to meeting the general Institute requirements, do the following: Obtain the agreement of a professorial faculty member to serve  as his or her academic and research adviser before the end of  the third term of graduate residence at Caltech. In consultation  with the adviser, the student must form a Ph.D. Thesis Advisory  Committee before the end of the fourth term. This committee  shall consist of at least three members of the Caltech profes -sorial faculty, with at least two members from the faculty in  mechanical and civil engineering.Pass both subject and research components of the oral candidacy  examination before the end of the eighth term of graduate aca -demic residence at Caltech. If the student has chosen a subject  minor, an examination on the subject of that program may be  included at the request of the discipline offering the subject minor.  Complete a minimum of 195 units of courses numbered 101  or above, that fulfill the required Ph.D. program listed below.  All units must be taken for grades and passed with a grade of at least a C, except for courses offered only on a pass/fail  basis. The course work towards the Ph.D. degree in mechanical  engineering is typically completed within the first three years of  residency at Caltech.  The faculty will evaluate the student™s research progress, class  performance, adviser™s input, and oral candidacy exam results to  determine whether a student will be admitted to or be able to maintain candidacy for the Ph.D. degree. Required Ph.D. Program a)  ME Core Subjects  (54 units): Course work in core mechanical  engineering subjects selected from the courses below. Pass with  a grade of at least C, 36 units must be in a single track (Depth requirement). An additional 18 units must be from the courses  below but can be in any track, including the chosen Depth track.Special Regulations438Tracks:  Thermal-fluid sciences: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101abc, APh 105 Aph 115-116, Ae/ME 118, ME119, Ae/ME 120, Ph 127abc, ME/CE 163, ChE 164-165Mechanics of solids, structures, and materials:  Ae/AM/CE/ME 102abc, Ae/APh 104 abc, AM/CE 151, Ae/Ge/ME 160ab, ME/CE 163, Ae/CE 165ab, ME/CE/Ge 174, Ae/AM/MS/ME 213, Ae/AM/CE/ME 214, Ae 220, Ae/CE 221, Ae/AM/ME 223, AM/CE/ME 252, ME/MS 260, ME/Ge/Ae 266abRobotics, Controls and Dynamics:  CDS 112, CDS 131, ME/CS/EE 133 abc, CDS 141, CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155, CDS 231, CDS 232, CDS 233.     b)  Electives or Minor (54 units): Additional engineering or science courses with course number 101 or above, except seminar or research courses. Pass with a grade of at least C, courses that  are approved by the Thesis Advisory Committee. These courses  are intended to provide further depth and incorporate breadth.  These units can be used to satisfy a minor requirement in anoth -er option.c)  Advanced mathematics or applied mathematics (27 units): Pass with a grade of at least C, chosen in consultation with adviser from the following list: ACM 101 or higher, CDS 232, Ma 108 or  higher, Ph 129. The requirement in mathematics is in addition to  the requirements above.  d)  Graduate engineering seminar (6 units): Six terms of AM/CE/ME 150 abc, within the 12 terms or 3 years in residence at Caltech. e)  Research  (54 units): Successfully complete at least 54 units of research and demonstrate satisfactory research progress. Registration Beyond the Sixth Year of Graduate Residence The annual approval of the Ph.D. Thesis Advisory Committee is neces -sary for registration beyond the twenty-fourth academic term of gradu -ate residence at Caltech. Thesis and Final ExaminationThe thesis examination will be given after the thesis has been formally  completed. This examination will be a defense of the doctoral thesis and a  test of the candidate™s knowledge in the specialized field of research. The  format of the examination can be chosen from the following two options,  by the student, in consultation with their research adviser: (i) a public sem -inar presented by the candidate, with an open question period, followed  by a private examination by the Examining Committee or (ii) a private pre -sentation to the Examining Committee followed by the examination, with a  public seminar on another date. The Examining Committee shall consist of  a minimum of four voting members, three of whom must be Caltech facul -ty; two members must be from MCE. The Thesis Defense Committee shall  be chaired by a committee member who is an MCE Caltech professorial  faculty member and not the student™s adviser. 439ME Subject MinorA student majoring in another branch of engineering or another division of the Institute may, with the approval of the faculty in the Department  of Mechanical and Civil Engineering and the faculty in his or her major field, elect mechanical engineering as a subject minor. The program  of courses must differ markedly from the major subject of study or  research, and must consist of at least 54 units of advanced courses  (101 or above) approved by the faculty in mechanical and civil engi -neering.MEDICAL ENGINEERING (MedE)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The Andrew and Peggy Cherng Department of Medical Engineering  offers a program of study that leads to the Ph.D. The medical engi -neering option at Caltech is designed for students with an engineering background who are interested in applications of micro-/nanoscale  science and technology in medicine, which forms the core of Caltech™s  multidisciplinary medical engineering. The program™s goal is to close  the gap between engineering and medicine. Our medical engineering research and education leverage Caltech™s strengths in engineering,  applied science, and other fundamental fields, to apply emerging tech -nological advances to medicine, and to create innovative diagnostic,  monitoring, and therapeutic systems. Our major tracks of research are:  micro/nano medical technologies and devices, medical nanoelectron -ics, biomedical materials and biomechanics, fluidics and bioinspired  design, and medical imaging and sensing.MedE Master™s Degree Students are not normally admitted to work towards the M.S. degree.  However, the M.S. degree may be awarded to a student along the way  toward a Ph.D. degree, provided Institute and Option requirements are  met. The Option requirements for the MS degree are the same as those  for the Ph.D. degree except that the MS degree does not require research  units, qualifying exam, candidacy exam, and thesis defense. In general,  the degree is not conferred before the end of the first year of residence.  MedE Degree of Doctor of Philosophy (a)  Admission to Candidacy.  To be recommended for candidacy for  the Ph.D. program in medical engineering, each student must, in  addition to meeting the general Institute requirements of a min -imum of 135 units of graduate work, complete all the following requirements: Complete 27 units of advanced math courses (i.e., 100 level or above) or ACM 100ab, as arranged with his/her adviser. Math  courses that are recommended include, but are not limited to:  ACM 100ab, ACM/IDS 101, ACM/IDS 104, ACM 105, ACM 106abc, GE/ESE 118, ACM 201ab, ACM 210ab, ACM/EE/CMS 116, Ma 125, and Ma 112ab.  Special Regulations440 Complete the three-term seminar sequence, MedE 100abc (1  unit), with a pass grade. Complete MedE 101 (9 units) with a pass grade. Complete MedE/BE/Ae 243 (9 units), ChE/BE/MedE 112 (9 Units) or ChE103B (9 Units). Complete EE 111 (9 units).Complete at least 27 units of MedE 291 individual research. Complete minimally an additional 42 units of advanced courses (100 level or higher) in any of the following 8 topical areas as  arranged with the student™s adviser. Courses that are recom -mended but not limited to, include:1. Fundamental and Mathematically Oriented Engineering: APh/EE 130 (EM), CDS 101, CDS 110, CDS 140, ChE 103abc, ChE/BE/MedE 188, EE 112, EE/Ma 126 ab, EE 151, EE/CS/IDS 160, EE/CS 161, MS 115, ME 115 ab, ME 118, ME 119ab.2. Biology and Physiology: BE 150, BE 151, BE/Bi 152, BE 159, Bi/Ch 110, Bi/Ch 113, Bi 122, Bi 129, Bi 145, Bi/ CNS/NB 150, Bi/CNS 162, CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187.3. Biomaterials, Biomechanics, and Bioinspired Design: Ae/ BE  242, BE 141, BE159, Ch/ChE 147, ME/MS 260, MS 115, MS/ME/MedE 116.4. Biosensing: APh/EE 130, APh/EE 131, APh/EE 132, ChE/BE/MedE 112, EE/MedE 114ab, EE/MedE 115, EE 151, EE 161, MedE/EE/BE 168abc, MedE 201ab, MedE 202. 5. Fluid Mechanics: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101abc, Ae 160, Ae/BE 242, ChE/BE/MedE 112. 6. Solid Mechanics: Ae/AM/CE/ME 102abc, Ae 160, AM/ CE 151ab, MS/ME/MedE 116.7. Medical Photonics and Imaging: APh/EE 130, APh/EE 131, APh/EE 132, Bi/BE 177, Bi/BE 227, ChE 114, EE/MedE 115, EE 151, EE/APh 180, MedE/EE/BE 168abc, MedE 205, MedE/EE 268.8. Medical Technologies and Devices: APh 109, APh 114abc,  APh/EE 130, APh/EE 131, APh/EE 132, BE/EE/MedE 189 ab, ChE/BE/MedE 112, ChE 115, E/ME/MedE 105 ab, EE 112, EE/MedE 114 ab, EE/MedE 124, EE 151, EE/APh 180, EE/BE/MedE 185, EE/MedE 187, MedE/EE/BE 168abc, MedE 201ab, MedE 202, MedE 205, MedE/EE 268.All required courses must be taken for grades and passed with a  grade of at least a C, except for courses offered only on a pass/ fail.Pass an oral qualifying examination, arranged by the option, on three major subjects before the beginning of the second aca -demic year. Any delay of taking the exam must be preapproved  by the option representative. Each student should consult his/ her adviser and/or the option representative to choose the three  major subjects. The three subjects of the exam should include  (1) Engineering math, Note: Students getting a B- or better for all 27 math units will be waived for ﬁmath subjectﬂ exam. (2) The major research topical area, and (3) Another related topical  441area. Students should take at least 27 units of advanced cours -es on each of the three exam subjects. Transferred credits can  be counted toward the 27 units. If the student has a subject  minor, examination on the minor subject may be included at the  request of the discipline offering the minor and with the approval  of his/her adviser. Note that the program is designed for the stu -dents to have multidisciplinary background.  Pass an oral candidacy examination on the subject of the Ph.D. research before the end of the second academic year  of residency. The Ph.D. oral candidacy exam is conducted  by a committee of minimum four members that is set up by the student and approved by the option representative. Three  members must be Caltech professorial faculty affiliated with  Medical Engineering. The fourth member may be a Caltech fac-ulty member or an outside professional of similar standing. The  committee must include the adviser, but another member of the  committee must be selected as chair. The committee chair must  be a Caltech professorial faculty member. This examination will  be a test of the candidate™s preparation and knowledge to con -duct research in his or her specialized doctoral research area. (b)  Thesis and Final Examination. The Ph.D. final thesis defense  exam is conducted by a committee that is set up by the student  and approved by the option representative. The committee should  be made up of minimum of 4 members and at least three of the  committee members must be Caltech faculty. The committee  must include the adviser, but another member of the committee  must be selected as chair. The committee chair must be a Caltech  Professorial faculty member. This final examination will be given no  less than two weeks after the doctoral thesis has been presented in  final form, and before its approval. This examination must be taken  at least four weeks before the commencement at which the degree  is to be granted. This thesis examination will be a defense of the  doctoral thesis and a test of the candidate™s knowledge in his or her  specialized doctoral research area. MedE Subject MinorA subject minor is not required, but recommended, for the Ph.D.  degree in medical engineering. However, credits from the subject minor  cannot be double-counted for the core program. Students may choose  their original engineering disciplines as their minor subjects. Students are not allowed to choose medical engineering as a subject minor. NEUROBIOLOGY (NB)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  NeurobiologyŠthe study of the nervous systemŠis a highly integrative  science. The modern neurobiologist must be conversant with con -cepts from molecular biology, cell and developmental biology, systems  neuroscience, animal behavior, and mathematical modeling. The aim  Special Regulations442of the graduate program is to expose each student to this breadth of  the discipline. To accomplish this, we offer a first-year curriculum with  requirements in specified areas, along with a core course that spans  many subjects. Students enter neurobiology from many different dis -ciplines, ranging from particle physics to physiology to psychology.  Accordingly, each Ph.D. student is paired with a first-year adviser so  the course selections can best complement the student™s background.  In later years, the student™s focus is on original research in a chosen  specialty. Our goal is that students will graduate with specific research  accomplishments and the broad understanding required to chart their  subsequent forays in brain science.NB AdmissionApplicants are expected to have studied college-level mathematics,  physics, chemistry, and biology. They should also have experience in  independent research. Coursework in neurobiology and experience in  scientific computing are helpful, but not required. Whenever possible,  applicants will be interviewed on campus before final admission deci -sions are made. NB Master™s Degree The option does not admit students for work toward the master's  degree. A terminal M.S. may be awarded in exceptional circumstances. NB Degree of Doctor of Philosophy First-year adviserEach incoming student is paired with an academic adviser during the first  year. This mentor will guide the student in course selection and other deci -sions, taking the student™s background into account. Where possible, this  adviser will not be one of the prospective rotation supervisors.  RotationsFirst-year students carry out three laboratory rotations, each lasting one  quarter. At least two of these should be with faculty participating in the  option. By June 30 of the first year, students choose a Ph.D. adviser. Formal ClassesStudents take at least 6 quarter courses (54 units) as follows:1. Bi/CNS/NB 164, Tools of Neurobiology 2. Bi 252, Responsible Conduct of Research 3. One course in molecular, cellular, developmental  neurobiology 4. One course in circuits, systems, behavioral biology 5. One course in mathematical methods (depending on the stu-dent™s background) 6. Two electives For a list of courses in subject areas 3Œ5, see the option website. All  courses must be taken for a grade unless only offered pass/fail.  443Teaching All students are to serve as teaching assistants for at least two terms. Admission to CandidacyTo qualify for candidacy, the student must first demonstrate broad  competence by passing each of the first-year courses with a grade of B or higher. Failure here can be remedied by successful second-year  coursework. By June 30 of the second year, the student must also  defend a thesis proposal in an oral exam before a qualifying exam  committee of at least three faculty. This exam will also cover general  knowledge in the relevant field. With special permission, the oral exam  may be retaken once before the end of winter quarter of the third year.  Students that do not advance to candidacy by the end of the third year  may not continue in the program. Thesis Advisory CommitteeOnce admitted to candidacy, the student chooses a Thesis Advisory  Committee of at least three faculty. This committee serves as a source  of advice independent of the Ph.D. adviser throughout the student™s  tenure. Each year, before the end of June, the student delivers a writ -ten progress report, followed by a meeting with the Thesis Advisory  Committee.Thesis Examination CommitteeThis committee should consist of a minimum of four voting members, three of whom must be Caltech faculty. The final oral examination  covers principally the work of the thesis, and according to Institute reg -ulations must be held at least three weeks before the degree is to be  conferred.  PHYSICS (Ph)Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program  The physics option offers a program leading to the degree of Doctor  of Philosophy. This program prepares students for careers in scien -tific research or research combined with teaching, and so its most  important part is independent research. Courses are offered that give a  broad treatment of both fundamental physics and specialized physics  research topics. These are intended both to help a beginning graduate  student prepare for research and to broaden an advanced student™s  knowledge of physics. Caltech research opportunities include elemen -tary particle physics, nuclear physics, cosmic-ray, gamma-ray, and  X-ray astronomy, submillimeter astronomy, condensed-matter physics,  atomic/molecular/optical physics, quantum information, applied phys -ics, gravitational physics, cosmology, astrophysics, mathematical phys -ics, biophysics, and theoretical physics.  A Master of Science degree may be awarded upon completion of  a program of courses. Students are not normally admitted to work  toward the M.S. in physics unless they are also working toward a Ph.D.  AdmissionSpecial Regulations444The application submission deadline for physics is December 15. The admission process follows Institute regulations. The GRE tests (general  and advanced subject) are not required and scores will not be consid -ered for admission.  Ph Master™s Degree A Master of Science degree in physics will be awarded, upon request,  to physics Ph.D. students who have completed the oral and written candidacy examinations. Alternatively, a master™s degree will be award -ed to any Caltech graduate student in good standing upon satisfactory completion of a program approved by the option representative that  fulfills the following requirements: Ph 125 abc27 units(If this course, or its equivalent, was taken as part of an undergraduate program, it may be  replaced by 27 units of any quantum-mechanicsŒ based course.)Physics electives81 unitsThese must be selected from physics courses  numbered 100 and above. Other electives27 unitsThese must be graduate courses from any option  at Caltech.Substitutions of other graduate courses in place of the above requirements must be approved by the option representative.  In exceptional cases, undergraduate students may receive concur -rent B.S./M.S. degrees if the above requirements are met in addition  to the relevant B.S. requirements, upon approval from the Physics  Graduate Committee, the graduate admissions committee, and the physics executive officer. Such students must produce a detailed peti -tion demonstrating accomplishments that would warrant normal admis-sion to the physics graduate program. Ph Degree of Doctor of Philosophy In addition to the general Institute requirements for a Ph.D., the partic -ular requirements for a doctorate in physics include admission to can -didacy as described below, writing a thesis that describes the results  of independent research, and passing a final oral examination based on  this thesis and research. Physics graduate students may exercise the  pass/fail option on any and all courses taken. Advising structure and thesis supervisionAn academic adviser is appointed for each student upon admission to  the graduate program in physics. The academic adviser will serve as  the primary mentor until the student finds a research adviser. Students  445will meet with their academic adviser to decide on their first-year course  schedule, and are encouraged to continue these meetings quarterly until  the student finds a research adviser. During the first year of study, stu -dents should consult with their academic adviser, the option representa -tive, the executive officer, and/or individual faculty members to select a  tentative research group. Once a research adviser is selected students  may either replace the originally appointed academic adviser or maintain  both a research adviser and academic adviser. At any time, a student  may consult with the option representative concerning such matters as  advising.Students should consult with the executive officer to assemble their  oral candidacy committee and Thesis Advisory Committee (TAC) by  the end of their third year. The TAC is normally constituted from the  candidacy examiners, but students may propose variations or chang -es at any time to the option representative. The TAC chair is normally  someone other than the research adviser. The TAC chair will typically  also serve as the thesis defense chair, but changes may be made in  consultation with the executive officer for physics and the option repre -sentative.The candidacy committee will examine the student™s knowledge of  his or her chosen field and will consider the appropriateness and scope  of the proposed thesis research during the oral candidacy exam. This  exam represents the formal commitment of both student and adviser  to a research program. After the oral candidacy exam, students will  hold annual meetings with the TAC. The TAC will review the research  progress and provide feedback and guidance towards completion of  the degree. The TAC, research, and/or academic advisers  provide the majority  of mentoring to the student. In addition, the option representative and  other members of the faculty are always available to provide advice  and mentoring on any aspect of research, progress toward the Ph.D.,  future careers, and other aspects of life in graduate school. Basic Physics RequirementPhysics students must demonstrate proficiency in all areas of basic  physics, including classical mechanics (including continuum mechan-ics), electricity and magnetism, quantum mechanics, statistical physics, optics, basic mathematical methods of physics, and the physical origin of everyday phenomena. A solid understanding of these fundamental areas of physics is considered essential and proficiency will be tested  by two written candidacy examinations. No specific course work is required for the basic physics require -ment, but some students may benefit from taking several of the basic  graduate courses, such as Ph 106, Ph 125, and Ph 127. A syllabus describing the exam contents will be available, and students are  encouraged to study independently for the exams, rather than taking a heavy load of basic physics courses. In addition, the class Ph 201 will provide additional problem solving training that matches the basic  physics requirement.   The written exams are typically offered in July and in October,  and the two separate exams may be taken at different times. This  Special Regulations446flexible scheduling of the written exams allows students to prepare  for the exams while simultaneously learning about research areas,  either through advanced courses, reading courses, or participation  in a research group. The exams can be attempted up to three times  and must be successfully completed by the end of the second year  of study.  Advanced Physics RequirementIn addition to demonstrating a proficiency in basic physics, students must  also establish a broad understanding of modern physics through study in  six graduate courses. The courses must be spread over at least three of  the following four areas of advanced physics:  1. Physics of elementary particles and fields   Nuclear physics, high-energy physics, string theory 2.    Atomic/molecular/optical physics, condensed-matte  physics, quantum information3. Physics of the universe  Gravitational physics, astrophysics, cosmology 4. Interdisciplinary physics   e.g., Biophysics, applied physics, chemical physics,  mathematical physics, experimental physics Each area is meant to be covered by the equivalent of a one-term  course, and a list of example courses for each of the areas can be found  at the physics option website. Other courses may be substituted with per-mission of the physics option representative. Oral Candidacy ExamThis exam is primarily a test of the candidate™s suitability for research in  his or her chosen field. The professor with whom the student plans to  do research will be a member of the exam committee, and normally the  student will have already begun research (Ph 172) on a definite topic with  that professor. The examination will cover the student™s research work and  its relation to the general field of specialization. Before being allowed to  take this exam, a student must have satisfied all the other requirements for  admission to candidacy. The oral candidacy exam should be completed  by the end of the third year (12 term) of graduate residence. Admission to CandidacyTo be recommended for Ph.D. candidacy, a student must pass two terms  of Physics Seminar (Ph 242), satisfy the Basic Physics Requirement by  passing the written candidacy examinations, satisfy the Advanced Physics  requirements, and pass the Oral Candidacy Examination. These require -ments are designed to ensure that students have an adequate preparation  in the basic tools of physics, as well as a broad general knowledge of  advanced physics. 447Research RequirementsThere are no specific research requirements, but in general a substantial  effort is required to master the techniques in a given field and carry out  a significant piece of original research. Students are strongly advised to  start doing part-time research as soon as possible by taking reading and  research units (Ph 171Œ172) in parallel with formal coursework. Teaching Requirement It is expected that each graduate student will, as part of the Ph.D. graduation requirements, serve as a teaching assistant for at least one  term, an experience that most students find provides valuable expe -rience for their future careers. Students are encouraged to fulfill this  requirement within the first three years of residency.  Thesis and Final ExaminationA final oral examination will be given not less than two weeks after the thesis has been presented in final form. This examination will cover the  thesis topic and its relation to the general body of knowledge of phys -ics. The candidate is responsible for completing the thesis early enough  to allow the fulfillment of all division and Institute requirements, with  due regard for possible scheduling conflicts.  Degree progress timelineThe following timeline is required for satisfactory degree progress: 1.  Ph 242 should be taken by all students in their first year of grad-uate study. 2.  The written candidacy exams should be attempted by the end of a student™s first year of graduate residence, and be passed by  the end of the second year.   3.  The Advanced Physics requirement should be completed by  the end of the second year of graduate residence, but may be  extended into the third year depending on the availability of spe -cific courses.  4.  The oral candidacy exam must be completed by the end of the third year (12th term) of graduate residence. The MinorA minor is not required, but a student may elect to pursue a minor in  another option.Language RequirementsThere are no language requirements for a Ph.D. in physics. Ph Subject MinorStudents desiring a subject minor in physics should discuss their pro -posed program with the chair of the Physics Graduate Committee.  Forty-five units from physics courses with numbers over 100 must be  taken for the subject minor, excluding Ph 129 and any specific courses  in physics required for the student™s major program. An oral exam may  Special Regulations448be required by the Physics Graduate Committee. This exam will include  both academic topics and topics on current physics research areas. QUANTUM SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (QSE) -ject minor by graduate students who are pursuing Ph.D. degrees   Caltech™s graduate degrees and is designed for students who wish     -ful completion of a program of study in the field. Completion of the   -ma by the statement, ﬁ–and by additional studies constituting a   Requirements requirements: APh/Ph 138ab18 units (two terms) from the following list: APh/EE 190abc, CS/ Ph 120 , EE/APh 158, Ph 137ab, Ph/CS 219abc, Ph/APh 223ab, APh 150 (special topics class when topic is relevant     included in consultation with the oversight committee.  be taken on a graded basis unless only offered as pass/fail. Students  must obtain a grade of B- or higher in all courses taken on grades and a pass in courses taken as pass/fail. At least 18 units of courses that  requirements in the major options unless absolutely required by the   total number of units required for the completion of the Ph.D. degree.  QSE Minor Administration faculty members reporting to the chair of the engineering and applied  science division. In consultation with their advisers and, if needed, with   courses individually tailored to each student™s background and needs,  with the objective that the student achieve a level of competence in spe- Committee for approval of their program of study. Upon completion of the   minor requirements have been fulfilled. 449SOCIAL AND DECISION NEUROSCIENCE (SDN)  Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program The Caltech Ph.D. program in social and decision neuroscience (SDN) pre -pares students to do research on the neurocomputational basis of deci -sion-making and social interactions. Research in this area requires training  in computational modeling, statistical methods, systems neuroscience,  neural measuring methods such as fMRI, EEG or single unit recordings, as  well as adequate understanding of related methods and results from the  social sciences. Students™ career paths include faculty jobs in neurosci -ence, psychology or marketing; faculty jobs in economics, political science  or finance programs; and industry positions in the technology, data sci -ence, finance, and neurotechnology sectors.  SDN Master™s Degree Students are not admitted to work towards the master™s degree. The  master™s degree might be awarded to an SDN student under exceptional  circumstances. In order to be eligible for a master™s degree, students must  complete at least 54 units of the courses required for the Ph.D. with a  passing grade, as well as a minimum of 81 additional units of graduate  work.AdmissionThe program seeks to recruit top students interested in the neurocomputa-tional basis of decision-making and social interactions. Ideal applicants will  have very strong quantitative backgrounds, regardless of their undergrad-uate major. Previous exposure to neuroscience, psychology or economics  is useful but not required. Detailed information on admission requirements  can be found at http://www.hss.caltech.edu/academics/graduate-studies/ social-and-decision-neuroscience-phd-program Course RequirementsStudents are required to complete 81 units of graduate coursework related  to social and decision neuroscience by the end of their second year, with  a grade of B or higher in each class. The coursework must satisfy the fol-lowing requirements. Students should take a minimum of 54 units during  their first year and 27 units during their second year. First year coursework  must include CNS/ Psy/Bi 102 ab (Brains, Minds, and Society) and two  courses in statistics, econometrics or machine learning. Students are also  required to take NB/Bi/CNS 150 (Introduction to Neuroscience), a graduate  course in behavioral economics, and two additional upper-undergraduate  or graduate courses (i.e., numbered 100 or higher) in economics, political  science or finance.   Lab RotationsStudents are required to complete three quarters of lab rotations during  their first year. These rotations should include work in two different  labs, for a minimum of one quarter each. Lab rotation plans need to be  approved by the option representative by the end of the second week of  Special Regulations450the fall quarter. Students must sign-up for 18 units of CNS 280 (Research  in Computation and Neural Systems) or SS 300 (Research in the Social  Science) for each quarter of lab rotations. Students are expected to  become full members of a research group by the end of the spring quarter  of their first year. The faculty member leading that lab becomes the stu -dent™s main adviser.   General Knowledge ExamStudents are required to take a written General Knowledge Exam in Social  and Decision Neuroscience. The exam is offered during Spring quarter of  the second year and students must pass it with a grade of at least 80%.  A list of topics and references associated with the exam can be obtained  from the option representative.  Other Requirements Students must satisfy the following additional requirements. 1. They must enroll in Psy 283abc (Graduate Proseminar in Social  and Decision Neuroscience) every quarter, from their first to their  last quarter in residence. This weekly seminar provides training  in academic skills such as writing, presenting, reviewing, and  career strategy, as well as breadth of knowledge in Social and  Decision Neuroscience.  2. Students must attend four social science seminars in econom-ics, finance or political science every quarter, from their first to  their last quarter in residence.  3. Students are also required to complete Bi 252 (Responsible  Conduct of Research) during their first year. 4. 4.Students must attend a conference and submit a grant pro -posal during their second year. 5. Starting their second year, students are expected to TA a mini -mum of three quarters total during their graduate career. 6. Starting the third year, students must present a poster or give a  talk at a conference every academic year. 7. Students must submit yearly progress reports to the SDN option  representative by the last day of classes of the Spring quar -ter, starting on their first year. A template for the report can be  obtained from the option representative. These reports will be  reviewed by the entire SDN faculty and granted one of three out -comes: approval, conditional approval, or program termination.  Students may receive at most one conditional approval of their  yearly report during their time in the Ph.D. program.   Candidacy RequirementStudents must form a thesis committee and defend their thesis proposal  to the committee. Students must pass this candidacy exam by the last  day of classes of their third year. A thesis committee must have four  members subject to the following constraints: at least one should be a  neuroscience faculty member, at least one should be a non-neuro social  science faculty member, and there should be at most one faculty member  from another institution. The main adviser cannot serve as the chair of the  451thesis committee.Thesis and Final ExaminationThe candidate is expected to complete and successfully defend their  thesis by the last day of classes of the spring quarter of their fifth year.  Extensions to an additional sixth year will be considered only at the can -didacy exam stage and, if necessary, for the proposed research plan. The  time of the defense should be determined in consultation with the main  adviser, the thesis committee and, if necessary, the option representative.  Students must submit a written copy of their dissertation to the the-sis  committee at least two weeks prior to the thesis defense date.SOCIAL SCIENCE (SS) Aims and Scope of the Graduate Program The Caltech Ph.D. program in social science prepares students for a  research career in economics and political science. It is designed to  produce scholars who are well grounded in the theoretical perspec -tives, the quantitative techniques, and the experimental methods of economics and political science. SS Master™s Degree Students who are enrolled in the Social Science Ph.D. program may  earn a M.S. degree after successful completion of 36 units of course  work, completed with a grade of B or better in each class, in addition to completing the coursework required for the first year of the Ph.D.  program.  AdmissionDetailed information on admission requirements can be found at  http://www.hss.caltech.edu/academics/graduate-studies/social-sciences-phd-pro -gram/admissions. Course Program First year.  The first-year curriculum consists of the following three-quar -ter course sequences: Analytical Foundations in Social Science (SS 201abc); Political Theory (SS 202abc); Foundations of Economics (SS 205abc) and Econometrics (SS 222abc). Each class must be completed with a grade of B or better. In addition, students must register for SS/ Psy/CNS 285 each quarter it is offered during the academic year.  At the end of the first year, the faculty will review the overall class  performance of each first-year student and assess the student™s ability  for clear self-expression in both oral and written English. A positive  assessment of class performance is required for a student to remain  in good standing in the program. If class performance is judged unsat -isfactory by the faculty, they may terminate the student from the pro -gram. In case of language deficiencies, the student is required to take  and pass a remedial English class, SS 299, during the summer quarter. Before the start of the second year, students are required to take a  written preliminary examination, which has four components, each cor -Special Regulations452responding to one of the first-year course sequences (SS 201, SS 202,  SS 205, and SS 222). The grades given are Honors, Pass, and Fail.  Students must achieve at least a Pass in all four parts. Students who fail the exam may be given the opportunity to retake the exam before  the start of the fall term by the faculty. The Social Science faculty will  then review the student™s performance on the exam(s), and progress,  to date. If it is not satisfactory, they may terminate the student from the  program by the beginning of the second year.  Second year. Second-year courses provide additional training in var -ious subfields of the social sciences.  In the fall quarter, all second-year students are required to enroll  in SS 224 and at least 27 additional units of advanced social science courses. In the winter quarter, all second-year students are required  to enroll in 36 units of advanced social science courses. In the spring  quarter, second year students must enroll in at least 27 units of  advanced social science courses (three typical courses) and enroll in  9 units of Research in Social Science (SS 300) to work on their sec -ond-year paper, for the units remaining to reach 36 units  Appropriate courses in other options, such as mathematics and  computer science, can be substituted for advanced social science classes, with the permission of the HSS division™s option representa -tive. All classes offered for grades must be completed with a grade of  B or better. Students may take independent reading and study cours -es, but during the second year such courses do not count toward the  above requirements.   Students can tailor their second-year curriculum to their specific research interests but are expected to include at least two second-year  course sequences. Such course sequences include Foundations of Political Economy (SS 210abc), Advanced Economic Theory (SS 211abc), Experimental Economics (SS 212abc), Financial Economics (SS 213abc), Topics in Theoretical and Applied Econometrics (SS  223abc), Applied Empirical Methods in the Social Sciences (SS  Development (SS 229abc), American and Comparative Politics (SS 231abc), and Experimental Methods of Political Economy (SS 260). Students may partially fulfill the second-year sequence requirement by  taking a sequence of courses in mathematics, such as Ma 108abc, Ma 110abc, Ma/ACM/IDS 140ab, or Ec 181ab. Third year . Beginning in their third year, and in all subsequent years,  all students must enroll in the 3-unit graduate student pro-seminar (SS  282abc) every quarter. Every student must make a presentation in this  class at least once a year. Students in the third year may also enroll in  additional courses, with the approval of their adviser. Third year stu -dents are required to take SS 281 in the fall quarter. In each quarter,  third year students should enroll in Research in Social Science (SS 300)  for the units remaining to reach 36 units.  Fourth and fifth years. Students need to register for 33 units of SS  300 and 3 units of the graduate student pro-seminar (SS 282abc). 453Progress in the program, and advancement to candidacyIn addition to the coursework and examinations described above, stu-dents must enroll in at least 36 units every quarter, including summer  (SS 300) and complete the following requirements.  By May 1 of the second year, each second-year student must sub -mit an outline describing a planned paper to their paper adviser, their  second reader, and the option representative. The second-year paper  can be co-authored. If the co-author is another graduate student, only  one of the students on the joint project can use the paper to fulfill the  requirement. The person using the paper for fulfilling the requirement is  expected to do most of the actual writing of the paper that is sub-mit-ted. The final paper is due on September 15. If the paper adviser and the second reader both find that a student™s second-year paper is  satisfactory, the student advances to the third year. If they do not, the  social science faculty, as a whole, will review the student™s paper. If  they decide that the paper is not satisfactory, they may terminate the  student from the program. At the end of the second year, the social  science faculty will also meet and assess each second-year student™s  ability for clear self-expression in both oral and written English. In case  of language deficiencies, the student is required to take and pass a  remedial English class, SS 299, during the summer quarter. Also, start -ing their second year, students are expected to TA a minimum of three  quarters total during their graduate career.   Third-year students must write a research paper and present it to  the faculty at the end of June. The third-year paper cannot be co-au -thored but should be worked on in consultation with and under the  direction of the student™s primary adviser. The option representative will  appoint a second third-year paper reader, who must be a member of  the social sciences professorial faculty. The adviser and second reader  will monitor progress and advise the student on the third-year paper.  The paper and the presentation must demonstrate to the faculty that  the student is capable of undertaking original research and presenting  it to a scholarly audience.  After completion of the third-year paper presentation, the social sci -ence faculty evaluates the student™s overall performance and research  potential. This review is based primarily upon the third-year paper, but  the faculty also verifies that the student has satisfactorily completed all previous requirements.  If this evaluation is favorable, the student is admitted to candidacy for the Ph.D. If the faculty evaluation is unfavorable, the student may be terminated from the program.  Organization of Thesis CommitteeBy October 1 of the third year, each student selects a primary advis -er. The adviser must be a professorial member of the social science  faculty at Caltech. It is possible to change advisers, in consultation with the option representative, if a student™s research interests change.  Students, in consultation with their adviser, must select two additional  thesis committee members after the student has advanced to candi-dacy (normally by the beginning of their fourth year). After a student Special Regulations454advances to candidacy, the division chairperson, in consultation with  the option representative, shall select a fourth member of the com -mittee with an eye to representing the diverse interests of the social  science faculty. One of the four members of the thesis committee may  be emeritus faculty, research faculty, or an external scholar, with the  approval of the option representative and the dean of graduate studies.  The chair of the thesis committee must be someone other than the pri-mary adviser, who will be appointed by the social science option repre -sentative in consultation with the primary adviser. The thesis committee  will also serve as the examination committee at the thesis defense.SS Degree of Doctor of Philosophy By November 1 of their fourth year, students must complete a disser -tation prospectus that outlines the proposed dissertation work and  present a tentative schedule detailing when the components of the  dissertation are to be completed. The prospectus must clearly identify  a project, or dissertation components, that should culminate in a job  market paper at the beginning of the student™s fifth year (August before  the start of the fifth year, in the case of students who seek a position in  political science). The prospectus must be submitted to and approved  by the thesis committee by November 1, and the status communicated by the principal adviser to the option representative.  By May 1 of the fourth year, the student is required to convene a  thesis prospectus seminar with their thesis committee. In this semi -nar, the student is to report on the current status of their dissertation  research and outline a plan and timeline for completing it. The seminar  must be based on the student™s planned job market paper, and a draft  of this paper must accompany the proposal. The student and the the- sis committee should reach a clear, mutual under-standing as to what  additional work needs to be done to complete and to successfully defend their dissertation. After the dissertation is completed, the student, in consultation with their adviser, must schedule an oral thesis examination to defend their  dissertation. The student must provide a written copy of their disser -tation to the option representative and all members of the examination  committee, and complete the examination notification in Regis, not less than two weeks prior to the thesis examination date. The dissertation is expected to represent publishable, original research. 455Special Regulations456Section FiveCourses457Courses numbered below 100 are taken primarily by undergraduate students. Those  numbered from 100 to 199 are taken by both undergraduates and graduates, and  those numbered 200 and above are taken primarily by graduate students. The school year is divided into three terms. The number of units assigned in any  term to any subject represents the number of hours spent in class, in laboratory, and  estimated to be spent in preparation per week. In the following schedules, figures in  parentheses denote hours in class (first figure), hours in laboratory (second figure),  and hours of outside preparation (third figure). At the end of the seventh week of each term, a list of courses to be offered the  following term is published by the Registrar™s Office. On the day of registration (see  Academic Calendar), an updated and revised course schedule is published announc -ing the courses, class hours, and room assignments for the term. Students may not  schedule two courses taught at the same time.Abbreviations Ae    Aerospace AN    Anthropology ACM   Applied and    Computational    MathematicsAM    Applied Mechanics APh   Applied PhysicsArt    Art History Ay     Astrophysics BMB   Biochemistry and    Molecular Biophysics BE    BioengineeringBi    BiologyBEM   Business, Economics   and Management ChE   Chemical EngineeringCh    ChemistryCE    Civil Engineering CNS   Computation and   Neural Systems CS    Computer Science CMS   Computing and   Mathematical   SciencesCDS   Control and    Dynamical Systems Ec    EconomicsEE    Electrical Engineering EST    Energy Science and    Technology E    Engineering (General) En    EnglishESL   English As a Second    LanguageESE   Environmental Science     and Engineering  F    FilmFS    Freshman Seminars Ge    Geological and    Planetary Sciences H    HistoryHPS   History and Philosophy    of Science Hum  HumanitiesIDS   Information and Data   SciencesIST    Information Science    and Technology ISP    Interdisciplinary    Studies Program  L    LanguagesLaw  LawMS    Materials Science Ma    MathematicsME    Mechanical   EngineeringMedE   Medical EngineeringMu    MusicNB    Neurobiology PVA    Performing and Visual    ArtsPl    PhilosophyPE    Physical Education Ph    PhysicsPS    Political Science Psy  PsychologySEC   Scientific and       Engineering    CommunicationSS    Social Science SA    Student Activities VC    Visual Culture Wr     Writing 458AEROSPACE Ae 100. Research in Aerospace.  Units to be arranged in accordance with work accomplished.   based on the satisfactory completion of a substantive research report,  which must be approved by the Ae 100 adviser and by the option  representative.  Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc. Fluid Mechanics.    Fun- of liquids and gases; the continuum hypothesis; review of thermody -namics; general equations of motion; kinematics; stresses; constitutive       Pullin, Austin, Colonius.Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc. Mechanics of Structures and Solids. 9 units  Introduction  with an emphasis on solids. Static and dynamic stress analysis. Two-  and three-dimensional theory of stressed elastic solids. Wave propaga -tion. Analysis of rods, plates and shells with applications in a variety of   Ae 103 ab. Aerospace Control Systems.  9 units (3-0-6); second and third terms. Prerequisites: CDS 110 (or equivalent), CDS 131 or permis -sion of instructor.     - Guidance, navigation, and control of autonomous aerospace systems.   Prerequisites: ACM 95/100  ab or equivalent (may be taken concurrently), Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or  equivalent (may be taken concurrently).   and implementation. Measurement methods, transducer fundamen -tals, instrumentation, optical systems, signal processing, noise theory,  analog and digital electronic fundamentals, with data acquisition and    Murray459Ae/APh 104 abc. Experimental Methods. (0-6-3) second, third terms. Prerequisites: ACM 95/100 ab or equivalent  (may be taken concurrently), Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent (may  be taken concurrently).  -tion. Measurement methods, transducer fundamentals, instrumentation,  optical systems, signal processing, noise theory, analog and digital  electronic fundamentals, with data acquisition and processing systems.    Ae 105 abc. Space Engineering. - based on astrodynamics. Topics include conic orbits with perturbations  (J2, drag, and solar radiation pressure), Lambert™s Theorem, periodic  orbits and ground tracks, invariant manifolds, and the variational   Introduction to spacecraft systems and subsystems, mission design,  rocket mechanics, launch vehicles, and space environments; spacecraft  mechanical, structural, and thermal design; communication and power systems; preliminary discussion and setup for team project leading to    Braun, Pellegrino.CE/Ae/AM 108 ab. Computational Mechanics.  For course description, see Civil Engineering.Ae 115 ab. Spacecraft Navigation.   This course will survey all aspects of mod-ern spacecraft navigation, including astrodynamics, tracking systems  for both low-Earth and deep-space applications (including the Global Positioning System and the Deep Space Network observables), and the statistical orbit determination problem (in both the batch and sequential     - APh/Ph/Ae 116.  Physics of Thermal and Mass Transport in Hydro -dynamic Systems. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. For course description, see Applied Physics.Ae/ME 118.  Classical Thermodynamics.  -  Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics. Basic laws of thermodynamics, work and  heat, entropy and available work, and thermal systems. Equations of state, compressibility functions, and the Law of Corresponding States. Thermodynamic potentials, phase equilibrium, phase transitions, and thermodynamic properties of solids, liquids, and gases. Examples will Aerospace 460thermal-science applications. Instructor: Dimotakis.Ae/ME 120. Combustion Fundamentals. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Recommended: ME 118 and 119 or equivalent.  The course will cover chemical equilibrium, chemical kinetics, combustion chemistry, transport phenomena, and the governing equations for multi -component gas mixtures. Topics will be chosen from non-premixed and   2021-2022.Ae 121 abc. Space Propulsion.   terms. Open to all graduate students and to seniors with instructor™s per -mission. Ae 121 is designed to introduce the fundamentals of chemical,  electric and advanced propulsion technologies.   The course focuses on the thermochemistry and aerodynamics of chemical and electrothermal   electromagnetic processes in electric thrusters.   These analyses provide  the opportunity to introduce the basic concepts of non-equilibrium   vehicle rocket engines, monopropellant engines, arcjets, ion thrusters,  magnetoplasmadynamic engines and Hall thrusters will be discussed.  Ae 121 also provides an introduction to advanced propulsion concepts   Ae 150 abc. Aerospace Engineering Seminar.  third terms.  Speakers from campus and outside research and manu -  EE/Ae 157 ab. Introduction to the Physics of Remote Sensing.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering.Ae 159. Optical Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites:  Ph 2, EE/Ae 157, or equivalent; APh 23 desirable.  This class covers both the fundamentals of optical engineering and the development of space optical systems. Emphasis is on the design and engineering of optical,  - and orientation of an image; geometrical aberration theory balancing tolerancing optical systems; transmittance, Etendu vignetting; radiative transfer; scalar vector wave propagationŠphysical optics; scalar dif -fraction image formation coherence; interferometry for the measurement  of optical surfaces astronomy; optical metrology wavefront sensing con - -ics in coronagraphy, Fourier transform spectrometers, grating spectrom -eters, and large aperture telescopes. Space optics issues discussed will  be segmented sparse aperture telescopes, radiation damage to glass,   461Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab. Continuum Mechanics of Fluids and Solids. 9 Elements of Cartesian tensors. Con- rotations and stretches, polar decomposition. Lagrangian and Eulerian   KineticsŠbalance laws. Linear and angular momentum, force, traction  stress. Cauchy™s theorem, properties of Cauchy™s stress. Equations of    supply. Laws of thermodynamics, notions of entropy, absolute tempera - of constitutive laws for materials without memory. Objective rates,     methods, and their applications to continuum mechanics problems  Lapusta. Ae/CE 165 ab. Mechanics of Composite Materials and Structures.    Introduction and fabrication technology, elastic deformation of compos -elastic deformation of multidirectional laminates (lamination theory, ABD   -ure for a laminate, strength of a single ply, failure models, splitting and  composite materials. Design criteria, application of design methods to select a suitable laminate using composite design software, hand layup    Ae 200. Advanced Research in Aerospace.  Units to be arranged.   Ae 201 a. Advanced Fluid Mechanics. Prerequisites: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent; AM 125 abc or  ACM/IDS 101 (may be taken concurrently).  Foundations of the mechan-   motion at high Reynolds numbers; hydrodynamic stability; boundary   Ae 204 ab. Technical Fluid Mechanics.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Prerequisite: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent.     Aerospace 462  Ae 205 ab. Advanced Space Project.  9 units (2-4-3); second, third  terms. Prerequisites: Ae105 abc.  This is an advanced course on the design and implementation of space projects and it is currently focused   Telescope (AAReST). The objective is to be ready for launch and opera - - design, assembly and testing of telescope optics; telescope calibration procedure and algorithms for wavefront control; thermal analysis; boom  on telescope performance; environmental testing of telescope system.  Each student will prepare a survey of the state of the art for the selected    Ae 208 abc. GALCIT Colloquium.      on conditions, some of the courses may be taught as tutorials or read -ing courses, while others may be conducted more formally. Ae/AM/MS/ME 213. Mechanics and Materials Aspects of Fracture.   -rently) or equivalent and instructor™s permission. -mental techniques in the study of fracture in metallic and nonmetallic  solids. Mechanics of brittle and ductile fracture; connections between  the continuum descriptions of fracture and micromechanisms. Discus -sion of elastic-plastic fracture analysis and fracture criteria. Special  topics include fracture by cleavage, void growth, rate sensitivity, crack   -ditional materials. Fatigue crack growth and life prediction techniques  will also be discussed. In addition, ﬁdynamicﬂ stress wave dominated,  failure initiation growth and arrest phenomena will be covered. This will  include traditional dynamic fracture considerations as well as discus - Ae/AM/CE/ME 214. Computational Solid Mechanics.       This course focuses on the analysis of elastic thin shell structures in the large deformation regime. Problems of interest 463include softening behavior, bifurcations, loss of stability and localization.  Introduction to the use of numerical methods in the solution of solid me-chanics and multiscale mechanics problems. Variational principles. Finite  element and isogeometric formulations for thin shells. Time integration,  initial boundary value problems. Error estimation. Accuracy, stability and  convergence. Iterative solution methods. Adaptive strategies.  Instructor: Pellegrino.Ae/AM/ME 215. Dynamic Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term. Prerequisites: ACM 100 abc or AM 125 abc; Ae/AM/CE/ME  102 abc. Fundamentals of theory of wave propagation; plane waves,  wave guides, dispersion relations; dynamic plasticity, adiabatic shear  banding; dynamic fracture; shock waves, equation of state. Ravichan -dran.Ae/ME/APh 218. Statistical Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ae/ME 118, or equivalent.  Overview of probability  elements of Quantum Mechanics, degenerate energy states, particles   elementary particles, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics, partition functions, connections with classical thermodynamics, and the Law of   Ae 220. Theory of Structures.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc. Fundamentals of buckling and stability,   of instabilities into snap-through and bifurcations; eigenvalues and  loads; buckling of columns; imperfection sensitivity; elastic-plastic wrinkling; design of imperfection insensitive shells and other topics. Not  Ae/CE 221. Space Structures.  This course   and preliminary design methods that are used in tension structures and  deployable structures. Geometric foundations, polyhedra and tessella -  deployable and adaptive structures, coiled rods and their applications,  Ae/AM/ME 223. Plasticity.  9 units (3-0-6); winter term. Prerequisite: Ae/ AM/CE/ME 102 abc or instructor™s permission.  Theory of dislocations Aerospace 464on the mechanical behavior in various crystal structures. Application  of dislocation theory to single and polycrystal plasticity. Theory of the  background for metals and fundamental postulates for plastic stress- strain relations. Variational principles for incremental elastic-plastic  problems, uniqueness. Upper and lower bound theorems of limit  analysis and shakedown. Slip line theory and applications. Additional   ME/MS/Ae/AM 224. Multifunctional Materials. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ae/AM/ME/Ge 225. Special Topics in Solid Mechanics.  Units to be  Subject matter changes depending  Ae/ACM/ME 232 ab. Computational Fluid Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6);  ACM 100 abc or equivalent. Development and analysis of algorithms   - -tial equations; stability, accuracy, aliasing, Gibbs and Runge phenom -ena, numerical dissipation and dispersion; boundary conditions. Survey  -tions for the numerical solution of the incompressible and compressible  Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, including shock-capturing methods.   Ae 233. Hydrodynamic Stability.   Prerequi -sites: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent. Laminar-stability theory as  a guide to laminar-turbulent transition. Rayleigh equation, instability cri -teria, and response to small inviscid disturbances. Discussion of Kelvin-   dual role of viscosity, and boundary-layer stability. Weakly nonlinear sta - 2021-2022.Ae 234 ab. Hypersonic Aerodynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Prerequisites: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent, AM 125  abc, or instructor™s permission.  An advanced course dealing with aero - from hypersonic small-disturbance theory, blunt-body theory, boundary  layers and shock waves in real gases, heat and mass transfer, testing   465 Molecular description of matter; distribution functions; discrete-velocity gases.       Ae 237 ab. Nonsteady Gasdynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms Part a: dynamics of shock waves, expansion waves, and related  discontinuities in gases. Adiabatic phase-transformation waves. Inter- shock and detonation waves in solids and liquids. Equations of state  -tion products. CJ and ZND models of detonation in solids and liquids.   Shepherd, Austin. Ae 239 ab. Turbulence.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  Prerequi -averaged equations and the problem of closure. Statistical description    -  Ae 240. Special Topics in Fluid Mechanics.   Topics and subject matter descriptions change each  year depending upon staff and student interest. Proposed topics for AY  21-22:1. First, second and third terms: Educational exchange at Ecole Polytechnique. -Instructor: Meiron2. Second term: Topics in Thermodynamics.  - Advances discussions on and extends topics covered in Ae/ME118. Forms of work and heat. Formulations of  equations of state, compressibility functions, and applications of the Law of Corresponding States. Thermodynamic potentials and their estima -tion, phase equilibrium and transitions, chemically reacting systems. Elements of Classical and Quantum Statistics, equipartition, thermal equilibrium of harmonic-oscillator and normal-mode systems, black-body spectrum and radiation. Heat capacity of gases, liquids, and solids. Ap -systems, and thermal sciences. Instructor: Dimotakis.Aerospace 4663. Second term: Topics in Wind Energy.    resources and their extraction. Topics include the physical origins of  topography and built environments; theoretical limits on wind energy extraction by wind turbines and wind farms; modeling of wind turbine aerodynamics and wind farm performance. Instructor: Dabiri.Ae 241. Special Topics in Experimental Fluid and Solid Mechan -ics. Prerequisite: Ae/APh 104 or equivalent or instructor™s permission.    Ae/BE 242. Biological Flows: Propulsion.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent or ChE 103 a.      Dabiri.MedE/BE/Ae 243. Physiological Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Medical Engineering. Ae 250. Reading and Independent Study.  second, third terms.   Ae/CDS/ME 251 ab. Closed Loop Flow Control.  9 units; (3-0-6 a, 1-6-1 b); second, third term. Prerequisites: ACM 100abc, Ae/APh/CE/ME  101abc or equivalent. This course seeks to introduce students to recent  developments in theoretical and practical aspects of applying control to     order modeling; principles and design of actuators and sensors. Third     Ae/AM/CE/ME/Ge 265 ab. Static and Dynamic Failure of Brittle Sol -ids and Interfaces, from the Micro to the Mega.  9 units; (3-0-6); First, term. Prerequisites: Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc (concurrently) or equiva -lent and/or instructor™s permission.  Linear elastic fracture mechanics  of homogeneous brittle solids (e.g. geo-materials, ceramics, metallic -ture, fracture of bi-material interfaces with applications to composites  as well as bonded and layered engineering and geological structures;  467 fracture mechanics of homogeneous engineering materials; dynamic  shear dominated failure of coherent and incoherent interfaces at all  length scales; dynamic rupture of frictional interfaces with application to  earthquake source mechanics; allowable rupture speeds regimes and  connections to earthquake seismology and the generation of Tsunamis.   ME/Ge/Ae 266 ab. Dynamic Fracture and Frictional Faulting.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.ANTHROPOLOGY An 14. Introduction to Sociocultural Anthropology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.  gatherers and other early forms of human subsistence and social or -kinship and marriage, gender relations, language, psychology, religion,   law, and warfare. Contemporary tribalism and interethnic relations are   An 15. Human Evolution. What makes hu-mans unique and how did we evolve? This course will review 8 million   features of our species including bipedalism, tool use, language, and   the genetic, fossil, and archaeological records. Concepts from evolu -tionary biology and anthropology will be covered including adaptation,  phylogenetics, life history theory, behavioral ecology, and gene-culture   An 16. World Archeology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  How do we know what we think we know about ancient peoples and societies? Archaeol -ogy is the study of past societies through the material traces they left  behind from the great pyramids to microscopic bits of garbage. This  course will review the global archaeological record from the earliest    - Throughout the course we will discuss methodologies of site discovery,   -   An 97. Undergraduate Research.  Units to be arranged; any term. Prerequisites: advanced Anthropology and instructor™s permission.  Anthropology 468  fail. An 101. Selected Topics in Anthropology.  Units to be determined by  Topics to be   An 102. Ancient Tech: The Archaeology of Revolutionary Inven -tions. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.   tools. In this class we will investigate ancient inventions that transformed human societies. Using archaeological methods, theory, and evidence  we will reconstruct past technologies and their social consequences. We will evaluate why and how similar technologies arose indepen -dently in different cultural contexts. The class will focus on inventions  in four realms: 1) stone, bone and metal weaponry, 2) writing and other  record keeping systems like the Inka khipu, 3) land transformation and agriculture, and 4) transportation including networks like the Silk Road. Throughout the term, students will work on an anthropological research project of their choice. Not offered 2021-2022. An/PS 127. Corruption. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: AN  14 or PS 12.   misappropriation of all manner of public resources. How do we measure  corruption? What are its costs and social consequences? What have  culture and psychology got to do with it? How much do governance  and a free press matter? What are the potential solutions? Students  will work closely with the professor to develop an independent and   Ensminger. APPLIED AND COMPUTATIONAL  MATHEMATICS  ACM 11.  Introduction to Computational Science and Engineer-ing.   This course is intended to serve as a practical introduction to the methods of computational science and engineering for students in all majors. The  goal is to provide students exposure to and hands-on experience with commonly-used computational methods in science and engineering, with undergraduate students. Topics covered include computational simula -tion by discretization in space and time, numerical solution of linear function approximation via interpolation and regression. Emphasis is on 469understanding trade-offs between computational effort and accuracy,  and on developing working knowledge of how these tools can be used to solve a wide range of problems arising in applied math, science, and engineering. Assignments and in-class activities use MATLAB. No prior  experience with MATLAB expected.  Instructor: Qian.ACM 80 abc. Undergraduate Thesis.   Prerequisites: instructor™s permission, which should be obtained suf - Individual research  project, carried out under the supervision of a member of the ACM  faculty (or other faculty as approved by the ACM undergraduate option    ACM 81 abc. Undergraduate Projects in Applied and Computational  Mathematics. Units are assigned in accordance with work accom -  is required before registering.  Supervised research or development in  ACM by undergraduates. The topic must be approved by the project    ACM 95/100 ab. Introductory Methods of Applied Mathematics for  the Physical Sciences. 12 units (4-0-8); second, third terms. Prereq -uisites: Ma 1 abc, Ma 2 or equivalents. Laurent series, contour integration, residue calculus. Ordinary dif -   equation, separation of variables, Laplace equation, transform methods, wave equation, method of characteristics, Green™s functions. Instruc - ACM/IDS 101 ab. Methods of Applied Mathematics. 12 units (4-4- equivalent. evaluation of integrals (Laplace method, stationary phase, steepest descents), perturbation methods, WKB theory, boundary-layer theory,   - -pansions, convergence theory. Gibbs and Runge phenomena and their   Review of numerical stability theory for time evolution. Fast spectrally- -tions in general domains. Integral-equations methods for linear partial  - include theoretical questions as well as programming implementations  Applied and Computational Mathematics470Bruno.ACM/IDS 104. Applied Linear Algebra.  -requisites: Ma 1 abc, some familiarity with MATLAB, e.g. ACM 11 is  desired.  This is an intermediate linear algebra course aimed at a diverse group of students, including junior and senior majors in applied math -   - discrete Fourier series and the fast Fourier transform, eigenvalues   eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, condition number, principal  component analysis, the Schur decomposition, methods for computing eigenvalues, non-negative matrices, graphs, networks, random walks,   ACM 105. Applied Real and Functional Analysis. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 108a, ACM/IDS 104 or equivalent.  This course is about the fundamental concepts in real and functional  analysis that are vital for many topics and applications in mathematics,  physics, computing and engineering. The aim of this course is to pro -vide a working knowledge of functional analysis with an eye especially for aspects that lend themselves to applications. The course gives an  - mapping and closed graph theorem, uniform boundedness principle.   linear maps, completeness, Banach spaces, Hilbert spaces, Lp spaces, duality of normed spaces and dual operators, dense subspaces and  - -calculus of variations, Sobolev spaces with applications to PDEs, weak solvability theory of boundary value problems. ACM/EE 106 ab. Introductory Methods of Computational Mathemat-ics.     The sequence covers the introductory methods in both theory and implementation of numerical linear algebra, approximation theory, ordinary differential equations, and partial differential equations.  The linear algebra parts cover basic methods such as direct and iterative solution of large linear systems, including LU decomposition, splitting method (Jacobi iteration, Gauss-Seidel iteration); eigenvalue and vector computations including the power method, QR iteration and Lanczos iteration; nonlinear algebraic solvers. The approximation theory includes  and splines; least square method, and numerical quadrature. The ODE  471parts include initial and boundary value problems. The PDE parts include   -tions. Study of numerical PDE will include stability analysis. Program-CMS/ACM/IDS 107. Linear Analysis with Applications. 12 units (3-0-9). See course description in Computing and Mathematical Sciences. ACM 109. Mathematical Modelling. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prereq -uisites ACM 95/100 ab or equivalent. This course gives an overview of  arising in the biological, engineering, physical and social sciences. Em-phasis will be placed on the principles used to develop these models, and on the unity and cross-cutting nature of the mathematical and com -putational tools used to study them. Applications will include quantum, atomistic and continuum modeling of materials; epidemics, reacting-     Ec/ACM/CS 112. Bayesian Statistics. 9 units (3-0-6). See course description in Economics.CMS/ACM/IDS 113. Mathematical Optimization. 12 units (3-0-9). See course description in Computing and Mathematical Sciences.ACM/EE/IDS 116.  Introduction to Probability Models. 9 units (3-   This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts, methods, and models of applied probability and stochastic processes. The course is application oriented and focuses on  the development of probabilistic thinking and intuitive feel of the subject rather than on a more traditional formal approach based on measure theory. The main goal is to equip science and engineering students with  necessary probabilistic tools they can use in future studies and research. Topics covered include sample spaces, events, probabilities of events,  discrete and continuous random variables, expectation, variance, corre-lation, joint and marginal distributions, independence, moment gener-ating functions, law of large numbers, central limit theorem, random vectors and matrices, random graphs, Gaussian vectors, branching, Poisson, and counting processes, general discrete- and continuous-timed processes, auto- and cross-correlation functions, stationary processes, power spectral densities. Instructor: Zuev. CMS/ACM 117. Probability Theory and Stochastic Processes.  12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.ACM 118. Stochastic Processes and Regression.  12 units (3-0-9); second term. Prerequisites: CMS/ACM/IDS 107 or equivalent, CMS  Applied and Computational Mathematics472117 or equivalent, or permission of the instructor.  Branching processes, Poisson point processes, Determinantal point  processes, Dirichlet processes and Gaussian processes (including the     -mation, signal processing and learning will also be covered through their   CMS/ACM/EE 122. Mathematical Optimization. 12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.AM/ACM 127. Calculus of Variations.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Applied Mechanics.Ma/ACM/IDS 140 ab. Probability.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  For course description, see Mathematics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mathematics. ACM/IDS 154. Inverse Problems and Data Assimilation.  9 units (3-0- probability and statistics: ACM/IDS 104, ACM/EE 106 ab, ACM/EE/IDS  116, IDS/ACM/CS 157 or equivalent. Models in applied mathematics often have input parameters that are uncertain; observed data can be  used to learn about these parameters and thereby to improve predictive  capability. The purpose of the course is to describe the mathematical  and algorithmic principles of this area. The topic lies at the intersection    IDS/ACM/CS 157. Statistical Inference.  9 units (3-2-4). For course de- IDS/ACM/CS 158. Fundamentals of Statistical Learning.  9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Information and Data Sciences.ACM/EE/IDS 170. Mathematics of Signal Processing.  12 units (3-0-9); third term. Prerequisites: ACM/IDS 104, CMS/ACM/IDS 113, and  ACM/EE/IDS 116; or instructor™s permission.  This course covers classi-cal and modern approaches to problems in signal processing. Problems  may include denoising, deconvolution, spectral estimation, direction-of- arrival estimation, array processing, independent component analysis,  In particular, the class will cover techniques based on least-squares and  on sparse modeling. Throughout the course, a computational viewpoint   473 -cations. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Computer Science.ACM 190. Reading and Independent Study.  Units by arrangement.   Prerequisites: ACM 95/100 ab, ACM/IDS 101 ab, ACM 11 or equiva -lent. -ential Equations (PDEs) commonly encountered across mathematics,  engineering and science. The goal of the course is to study properties   and hyperbolic) and the behavior of their solutions using tools from  functional analysis with an emphasis on applications. We will discuss    laws, shocks, predator prey models, Burger™s equation, kinetic equa -- will use analytical tools such as Gauss™s theorem, Green™s functions,   well-posedness theory, asymptotic analysis, Fredholm theory, Fourier    solutions, vibrations, Huygens™ principle, Eikonal equations, spherical  - single- and double-layer potentials, Navier-Stokes equations, Reynolds     ACM/IDS 204. Topics in Linear Algebra and Convexity.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: CMS/ACM 107 or instructor™s  permission. develops some foundational results about matrices that have wide  application in computational mathematics, statistics, engineering, and   doubly stochastic matrices, variational principles for eigenvalues, eigen- -  equations, Hadamard products, nonnegative matrices, positive and  Tropp. ACM 206. Topics in Computational Mathematics.  9 units (6-0-3); sec-ond. Prerequisites: ACM 106ab.  Covers modern numerical methods.   Tropp. Applied and Computational Mathematics474ACM 210. Numerical Methods for PDEs. 9 units (3-0-6); third terms.  Prerequisite: ACM 11, 106 or instructor™s permission.   equivalence theorem, consistency, stability, convergence, truncation  error, CFL condition, Fourier stability analysis, von Neumann condi -  -rem, boundary condition analysis, group velocity and GKS normal mode   Riemann problems, shocks, contacts, rarefactions, discrete conserva -  and multiple dimensions, characteristic boundary conditions; iii) adjoint design, error analysis. Interface problems, level set methods for multi -   2021-2022. ACM/IDS 213. Topics in Optimization.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. -  Material varies year-to-year. Example topics include discrete optimization, convex and  computational algebraic geometry, numerical methods for large-scale  optimization, and convex geometry.  Instructor: Qian.ACM/IDS 216. Markov Chains, Discrete Stochastic Processes and  Applications. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ACM/EE/IDS  116 or equivalent.  -librium distributions and convergence of Markov chains, Markov chain   Hastings algorithm, coupling from the past, martingale theory and   ACM 217. Advanced Topics in Stochastic Analysis.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ACM/CMS/EE/IDS 117.  The topic of this   -  -ous time Brownian motion, Ito™s calculus, Girsanov theorem, stopping     475Ae/ACM/ME 232 abc. Computational Fluid Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. ACM 256. Special Topics in Applied Mathematics.  9 units (3-0-6);   element methods. Development of the most commonly used methodŠ-       -  ACM 257. Special Topics in Financial Mathematics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: ACM 95/100 or instructor™s permission.  A basic knowledge of probability and statistics as well as transform methods for  solving PDEs is assumed. This course develops some of the techniques -troductions to random walks, Brownian motion, quadratic variation, and  Ito-calculus. Connections to PDEs will be made by Feynman-Kac theo-rems. Concepts of risk-neutral pricing and martingale representation  are introduced in the pricing of options. Topics covered will be selected     ACM 270. Advanced Topics in Applied and Computational Mathe -matics. Hours and units by arrangement; second, third terms.  Advanced topics in applied and computational mathematics that will vary accord -ing to student and instructor interest. May be repeated for credit.  ACM 300. Research in Applied and Computational Mathematics.  Units by arrangement. APPLIED MECHANICS Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc. Mechanics of Structures and Solids.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  CE/Ae/AM 108 ab. Computational Mechanics. 9 units (3-5-1). For course description, see Civil Engineering.AM/ACM 127. Calculus of Variations.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: ACM 95/100.  First and second variations; Euler-Lagrange  equation; Hamiltonian formalism; action principle; Hamilton-Jacobi Applied Mechanics476 isoperimetric inequality; asymptotic methods and gamma convergence;  selected applications to mechanics, materials science, control theory  AM/CE/ME 150 abc. Graduate Engineering Seminar.  1 unit; each  Students attend a graduate semi-nar each week of each term and submit a report about the attended  seminars. At least four of the attended seminars each term should be from the Mechanical and Civil Engineering seminar series. Students not  registered for the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees must receive the instructor™s  AM/CE 151. Dynamics and Vibration.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Equilibrium concepts, conservative and dissipative systems,  single and multi degree-of-freedom systems, natural frequencies and  mode shapes of these systems (Eigenvalue problem associated with  the governing equations), phase plane analysis of vibrating systems,  forms of damping and energy dissipated in damped systems, response   spectrum concepts, vibration isolation, seismic instruments, dynam- and membranes, transverse vibration of strings, beams (Bernoulli-Euler  and Timoshenko beam theory), and plates, traveling and standing wave solutions to motion of continuous systems, Rayleigh quotient and the  shapes of discrete and continuous systems, frequency domain solu -tions to dynamical systems, stability criteria for dynamical systems, and introduction to nonlinear systems and random vibration theory.  Instruc-AM/ME 165. Finite Elasticity.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites:  Ae/Ge/ME 160 a. inverse methods. Variational methods. Applications to problems of   AM 200. Advanced Work in Applied Mechanics.  Hours and units by arrangement. A faculty mentor will oversee a student proposed,  independent research or study project to meet the needs of graduate  -ten report is required for each term of work.  AM 201. Advanced Topics in Applied Mechanics.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond, third terms.  The faculty will prepare courses on advanced topics to  Ae/AM/MS/ME 213. Mechanics and Materials Aspects of Fracture.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  477Ae/AM/CE/ME 214. Computational Solid Mechanics. 9 units (3-5-1). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/AM/ME 215. Dynamic Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/AM/ME 223. Plasticity.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  ME/MS/Ae/AM 224. Multifunctional Materials. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ae/AM/ME/Ge 225. Special Topics in Solid Mechanics.  Units to be arranged. For course description, see Aerospace. AM/CE/ME 252. Linear and Nonlinear Waves in Structured Media.  9 units (2-1-6); third term.  The course will cover the basic principles of wave propagation in solid media. It will discuss the fundamental  principles used to describe linear and nonlinear wave propagation in   in the dynamics of periodic media will also be discussed. Students learn  the basic principles governing the propagation of waves in discrete and  continuum solid media. These methods can be used to engineer materi- variety of engineering applications (e.g., vibration mitigation, impact - Daraio.Ae/AM/CE/ME/Ge 265ab. Static and Dynamic Failure of Brittle Sol -ids and Interfaces, from the Micro to the Mega.  9 units; (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. AM 300. Research in Applied Mechanics.  Hours and units by arrange-ment.   in research.  APPLIED PHYSICS APh/EE 9 ab. Solid-State Electronics for Integrated Circuits.  6 units  requirement.     semiconductor crystal growth and device fabrication technology, carrier  modeling, doping, generation and recombination, pn junction diodes,  MOS capacitor and MOS transistor operation, and deviations from ideal  behavior. Laboratory includes computer-aided layout, and fabrication  Applied Physics478and testing of light-emitting diodes, transistors, and inverters. Students learn photolithography, and use of vacuum systems, furnaces, and   2021-2022.APh 17 abc. Thermodynamics.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 1 abc, Ph 1 abc.  Introduction to the use of  thermodynamics and statistical mechanics in physics and engineer-ing. Entropy, temperature, and the principal laws of thermodynamics.  Canonical equations of state. Applications to cycles, engines, phase and chemical equilibria. Probability and stochastic processes. Kinetic  theory of perfect gases. Statistical mechanics. Applications to gases, 2021-2022. APh/EE 23. Demonstration Lectures in Classical and Quantum  Photonics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc.  This course covers fundamentals of photonics with emphasis on modern  applications in classical and quantum optics. Classical optical phenom- oscillation, and the applications of these phenomena in optical systems employing multiple-beam interferometry, Fourier-transform image  processing, holography, electro-optic modulation, optical detection and  heterodyning will be covered. Quantum optical phenomena like single   optical communications, radar, adaptive optical systems, nano-photonic  devices and quantum communications. Prior knowledge of quantum  APh/EE 24. Introductory Optics and Photonics Laboratory.  9 units (1-3-5); third term.  Prerequisites: APh 23. -quaint students with the contemporary aspects of optics and photonics   APh 77 bc. Laboratory in Applied Physics. 9 units (0-9-0); second, third terms.  laboratory equipment, procedures, and characteristic phenomena in   high-temperature superconductivity, black-body radiation, holography,   APh 78 abc. Senior Thesis, Experimental. -ond, third terms. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  -perimental research, open only to senior-class applied physics majors.  Requirements will be set by individual faculty member, but must include  a written report. The selection of topic must be approved by the Applied   479APh 79 abc. Senior Thesis, Theoretical.  third terms. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  Supervised theoretical  research, open only to senior-class applied physics majors. Require -ments will be set by individual faculty member, but must include a  written report. The selection of topic must be approved by the Applied    APh 100. Advanced Work in Applied Physics.  Units in accordance  with work accomplished. Special problems relating to applied physics,  arranged to meet the needs of students wishing to do advanced work. Primarily for undergraduates. Students should consult with their advis - Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc. Fluid Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/APh 104 abc. Experimental Methods. 5 second, third terms).  For course description, see Aerospace. APh/MS 105 abc. States of Matter.   terms. Prerequisites: APh 17 abc or equivalent.  Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, with emphasis on gases, liquids, materials, and  matter are presented with both classical thermodynamics and with  statistical mechanics. Conditions of equilibrium in systems with multiple degrees of freedom. Applications include ordered states of matter and   -APh/EE 109. Introduction to the Micro/Nanofabrication Lab.  9 units  Introduction to techniques of micro-and Students will be trained to use fabrication and characterization equip-ment available in the applied physics micro- and nanofabrication lab. Topics include Schottky diodes, MOS capacitors, light-emitting diodes,  scanning electron microscopy, and electron-beam writing.  Not offered   -fari.APh 110. Topics in Applied Physics.  terms. A seminar course designed to acquaint advanced undergradu -   Applied Physics480APh/Ph 112 ab. Noise and Stochastic Resonance. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  Prerequisites: Ph 12 abc, ACM 95/100 ab and  Ph 106 abc, equivalent background, or instructor™s permission.  The  nuisance since it diminishes the signal to noise ratio thereby obfuscat -ing weak signals or patterns. From a theoretical perspective, noise is   equations but requires stochastic-based modeling which incorporates   embedded information requires that a threshold be overcome in order  to outweigh concealment by noise. However, even below threshold,   coupled with noise can actually boost very weak signatures beyond  threshold by a phenomenon known as stochastic resonance. Although  it was originally demonstrated in nonlinear systems, more recent studies  have revealed this phenomenon can occur in linear systems subject,     condensed matter physics, neurophysiology, hydrodynamics, climate   -talists alike. Review of the current literature will be complimented by  background readings and lectures on statistical physics and stochastic    APh 114 abc. Solid-State Physics.  terms. Prerequisite: Ph 125 abc or equivalent.  Introductory lecture and   solid-state physics. Topics include crystal structure, symmetries in sol -ids, lattice vibrations, electronic states in solids, transport phenomena,  semiconductors, superconductivity, magnetism, ferroelectricity, defects,   APh/Ph 115. Physics of Momentum Transport in Hydrodynamic  Systems. 9 units (3-0-6);  second term.  Prerequisites: ACM 95 or equiva -lent. Contemporary research in many areas of physics requires some  knowledge of the principles governing hydrodynamic phenomena such  as nonlinear wave propagation, symmetry breaking in pattern forming     treatment of the fundamentals of momentum transport in hydrodynamic  analysis and rescaling, asymptotic analysis to identify dominant force  -  pattern formation. Students must have working knowledge of vector  481Advanced solution methods will be taught in class as needed. Instruc- APh/Ph/Ae 116. Physics of Thermal and Mass Transport in Hydro -dynamic Systems. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: ACM 95  or equivalent and APh/Ph 115 or equivalent. Contemporary research in  many areas of physics requires some knowledge of how momentum        -tion. Students must have working knowledge of vector calculus, ODEs, methods such as singular perturbation, Sturm-Liouville and Green™s    Ph/APh/EE/BE 118 ab.  Physics of Measurement. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Physics.EE/APh 120. Physical Optics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering. 9 units (0-4-5); third  term. For course description, see Materials Science. EE/APh 123. Advanced Lasers and Photonics Laboratory.  9 units (1-For course description, see Electrical Engineering.APh/EE 130. Electromagnetic Theory.  Elec- -   -  optical waveguides. Single mode and multimode waveguides. Nonlinear optics. Nonlinear propagation. Second harmonic generation. Parametric  EE/APh 131. Light Interaction with Atomic SystemsŠLasers. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: APh/EE 130.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering. APh/EE 132. Special Topics in Photonics and Optoelectronics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Interaction of light and matter, spontaneous and  stimulated emission, laser rate equations, mode-locking, Q-switching, Applied Physics482-   2021-2022.Ph/APh 137 abc. Atoms and Photons. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Physics.APh/Ph 138 ab. Quantum Hardware and Techniques.  9 units (3-0- or Ph 127ab or Ph137ab or instructor™s permission.  This class covers  multiple quantum technology platforms and related theoretical techniques,  and will provide students with broad knowledge in quantum science and   of near-term quantum computers, superconducting qubits, trapped atoms  and ions, topological quantum matter, solid state quantum bits, tensor-  EE/APh 149. Frontiers of Nonlinear Photonics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.APh 150. Topics in Applied Physics.  Units and terms to be arranged. Content will vary from year to year, but at a level suitable for advanced  undergraduate or beginning graduate students. Topics are chosen   present portions of this course.  APh 156 abc. Plasma Physics.  terms. Prerequisite: Ph 106 abc or equivalent.  An introduction to the  principles of plasma physics. A multitiered theoretical infrastructure will  be developed consisting of the Hamilton-Lagrangian theory of charged  kinetic theory of plasma as a gas of interacting charged particles, the   the magnetohydrodynamic model of plasma as an electrically conduct -  - to plasmas in both laboratory (fusion, industrial) and space (magneto- EE/APh 158. Quantum Electrical Circuits.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.BE/APh 161. Physical Biology of the Cell. 12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Bioengineering.MS/APh 162. Electronic Materials.  (3-0-6). For course description, see Materials Science.483MS/APh 171. Inelastic Scattering of Materials, Molecules, and Con-densed Matter.  (3-0-6). For course description, see Materials Science.EE/APh 180. Nanotechnology.  6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Electrical Engineering. APh/EE 183. Physics of Semiconductors and Semiconductor De-vices. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Principles of semiconductor electronic  structure, carrier transport properties, and optoelectronic properties  relevant to semiconductor device physics. Fundamental performance  aspects of basic and advanced semiconductor electronic and optoelec -tronic devices. Topics include energy band theory, carrier generation  and recombination mechanisms, quasi-Fermi levels, carrier drift and   APh/EE 190 abc. Quantum Electronics.  third terms.  Prerequisites: Ph 125 or equivalent.  Generation, manipula-tions, propagation, and applications of coherent radiation. The basic  theory of the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with resonant  atomic transitions. Laser oscillation, important laser media, Gaussian  harmonic generation, parametric oscillation, stimulated Brillouin and light by sound, integrated optics, phase conjugate optics, and quantum  APh 200. Applied Physics Research.  Units in accordance with work  accomplished.  research or reading. Students should consult their advisers before regis -Ae/ME/APh 218. Statistical Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. Ph/APh 223 ab. Advanced Condensed-Matter Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  For course description, see Physics. APh 250. Advanced Topics in Applied Physics.  Units and term to be arranged. Content will vary from year to year; topics are chosen ac - APh/MS 256. Computational Solid State Physics and Materials Science. 9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisites: Ph125 or equiva -lent and APh114ab or equivalent.computational methods to study electronic structure, lattice vibrations,  optical properties, and charge and heat transport in materials. Topics  total-energy pseudopotential method. DFT calculations of total energy,  structure, defects, charge density, bandstructures, density of states, fer - Astrophysics 484supercell and Density Functional Perturbation Theory (DFPT) methods.  Electron-electron interactions, screening, and the GW method. GW   (BTE) for electrons and phonons. Computations of heat and charge  transport within the BTE framework. If time permits, selected advanced topics will be covered, including methods to treat vander Waals bonds,  spin-orbit coupling, correlated materials, and quantum dynamics.    APh 300. Thesis Research in Applied Physics.  Units in accordance  with work accomplished. the student has progressed to the point where his or her research leads  directly toward a thesis for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Approval  of the student™s research supervisor and department adviser or registra - fail.ART HISTORY (For course descriptions, please see Visual Culture   ) ASTROPHYSICS Ay 1. The Evolving Universe.  9 units (3-3-3); third term; This course is  intended primarily for freshmen not expecting to take more advanced  astronomy courses and will satisfy the menu requirement of the Caltech  core curriculum.  Introduction to modern astronomy that will illustrate   basic questions, showing how our answers have changed in response  to fresh observational discoveries. Topics to be discussed will include  telescopes, stars, planets, the search for life elsewhere in the universe,    - FS/Ay 3. Freshman Seminar: Automating Discovering the Universe.  6 units (2-0-4); third term.  For course description, see Freshman Semi -nar. Ge/Ay 11 c. Planetary Sciences.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Ay 20.  Basic Astronomy and the Galaxy.   -requisites: Ma 1 abc, Ph 1 abc or instructor™s permission.  The elec-tromagnetic spectrum and basic radiative transfer; ground and space  observing techniques; ﬁpictorial Fourier descriptionﬂ of astrophysical  485 -tions; the birth, structure, evolution, and death of stars; the structure   of-magnitude calculations and scaling arguments in order to elucidate  the physics of astrophysical phenomena. Short labs will introduce   Ay 21. Galaxies and Cosmology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Pre -requisites: Ma 1 abc, Ph 1 abc or instructor™s permission.  Cosmological tests; constituents of the universe, dark matter, and dark energy; ther -mal history of the universe, cosmic nucleosynthesis, recombination, and  cosmic microwave background; formation and evolution of structure   - universe; quasars and other active galactic nuclei, and their evolution;   - Ay 30. Introduction to Modern Research.  Weekly seminar open to declared Ay majors. At the discretion of the  instructor, nonmajors who have taken astronomy courses may be  admitted. Course is intended for sophomores and juniors. This seminar  is held in faculty homes in the evening and is designed to encourage student communication skills as they are introduced to faculty mem -bers and their research. Each week a student will review a popular-level   Ay 31. Writing in Astronomy.  3 units (1-0-2); third term.  This course   proposals, topical reviews, professional journal manuscripts, and ar - Each student will adopt one of these formats in consultation with the course instructor and write an original piece. An outline and several drafts reviewed by both a faculty mentor familiar with the topic and the  course instructor are required. This course is most suitable for juniors   -Ay 43. Reading in Astronomy and Astrophysics.  Units in accor-dance with work accomplished, not to exceed 3. Course is intended  regular (biweekly) research and literature discussion groups. Instructor™s   Ay 78 abc.  Senior Thesis.    Previous SURF or independent study work Astrophysics 486can be useful experience. Course open to senior astronomy majors only.  Research must be supervised by a faculty member. Students wishing  invited to consult with the astronomy option representative. The student  will work with an adviser to formulate a research project, conduct original research, present new results, and evaluate them in the context of previ-In the second term, the research continues and an outline of the thesis itself should be reviewed with the adviser and the option representative. In the third term, research work is completed and the focus should turn to thesis writing. A written thesis of 20-100 pages must be completed  and approved by the adviser and the option representative before the end of third term. The student and advisor should maintain good com -of the thesis. First two terms are graded pass/fail, with grades updated at the end of the course to the appropriate letter grade for all three terms. Instructor: Staff. Ay 101.  Physics of Stars.  is recommended.  Physics of stellar interiors and atmospheres. Proper -ties of stars, stellar spectra, radiative transfer, line formation. Stellar  structure, stellar evolution. Nucleosynthesis in stars. Stellar oscilla -Ay 102. Physics of the Interstellar Medium.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ay 20 is recommended.  An introduction to observa -tions of the inter-stellar medium and relevant physical processes. The   -sociated with massive stars and supernovae, thermal balance in neutral  Ay/Ph 104. Relativistic Astrophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Ph 1, Ph 2 ab.  This course is designed primarily for junior and senior undergraduates in astrophysics and physics. It covers the  physics of black holes and neutron stars, including accretion, particle  acceleration and gravitational waves, as well as their observable conse-  Ay 105.  Optical Astronomy Instrumentation Lab.  9 units (1-5-3); third  term. Prerequisites: Ay 20.  An opportunity for astronomy and physics   the basic instrumentation tools of modern optical and infrared astrono -   technology, adaptive optics (wavefront sensors, deformable mirrors,   487Ay/Ge 107.  Introduction to Astronomical Observation.  9 units  recommended.  This hands-on, project-based course covers the design,   data reduction and analysis, and interacting with astronomical survey    the second module, students will use Palomar Observatory to propose   planetary topics. In the third module, students will query and work  with data from on-line archives and catalogs. The scope of the course  includes imaging and spectroscopic observational techniques at optical  and infrared wavelengths. The format centers on projects and practi -cal skills but also includes a lecture and problem set component to  establish the theoretical underpinnings of the practical work. The course     Ay 111 ab.  Introduction to Current Astrophysics Research.  1 unit   This course is intended primarily for  -couraged. Students are required to attend seminar-style lectures given by astrophysics faculty members, describing their research, to attend the weekly astronomy colloquia, and to follow these with additional readings on the subject. At the end of each term, students are required to summa -rize in oral or written form (at the discretion of the instructor), one of the covered subjects that is of most interest to them. Instructors: Djorgovski, Howard, Hopkins.Ge/Ay 117. Statistics and Data Analysis.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ay 119. Astroinformatics.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  This class is an in-troduction to the data science skills from the applied computer science,  statistics, and information technology, that are needed for a modern   astronomical applications. Open to graduate and upper-division on un -dergraduate students in all options. The topics covered include design  of data systems, regression techniques, supervised and unsupervised  machine learning, databases, Bayesian statistics, high performance     Mahabal, Duev. Ay 121. Radiative Processes.   Ph106bc, Ph 125 or equivalent (undergraduates).  The interaction of ra- -ton processes, coherent emission processes, synchrotron radiation,   Ravi.Astrophysics 488Ay 122 abc. Astronomical Measurements and Instrumentation.  9  Measurement and signal analysis techniques througout the electromag -observatories. Ay 122a concentrates on infrared, optical, and ultraviolet    processing. Ay 122b concentrates on radio through submillimeter tech - aperture synthesis arrays. Signal analysis techniques and probability  and statistics, as relevant to astronomical measurement. Ay 122c (not    Ay 123. Structure and Evolution of Stars.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ay 101; Ph 125 or equivalent (undergraduates).  Thermo-dynamics, equation of state, convection, opacity, radiative transfer, stel -lar atmospheres, nuclear reactions, and stellar models. Evolution of low-   Ay 124.  Structure and Evolution of Galaxies.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ay 21; Ph 106 or equivalent (undergraduates).  Stel-lar dynamics and properties of galaxies; instabilities; spiral and barred galaxies; tidal dynamics and galaxy mergers; stellar composition, masses, kinematics, and structure of galaxies; galactic archeology; galactic star formation; feedback from stars and super-massive black holes; circum-galactic medium. Instructor: Hopkins.Ay 125. High-Energy Astrophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prereq -uisites: Ph 106 and Ph 125 or equivalent (undergraduates).  High-energy    - Ay 126. Interstellar and Intergalactic Medium.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisite: Ay 102 (undergraduates).  Physical processes in   H II regions, supernova remnants, star formation, global structure of  Hillenbrand.Ay 127.  Astrophysical Cosmology.   Pre -requisites: Ay 21; Ph 106 or equivalent (undergraduates).  Cosmology;  thermal history of the universe; nucleosynthesis; microwave background   Ge/Ay 132. Atomic and Molecular Processes in Astronomy and  Planetary Sciences. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geo-logical and Planetary Sciences. 489Ge/Ay 133. The Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sci-ences. Ge/Ay 137. Planetary Physics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Ay 141 abc. Research Conference in Astronomy.  second, third terms.  Oral reports on current research in astronomy,   presentation of technical material. A minimum of two presentations   are encouraged to participate in a public-level representation of the   the option communication requirement and is required of all astronomy    -linan, Phinney, Martin. Ay 142. Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics.  Units in accor-dance with work accomplished. The student should consult a member  -  Ay 143. Reading and Independent Study.  Units in accordance with  work accomplished. The student should consult a member of the  study outlined. Approval by the student™s adviser must be obtained   Ay 144.  Independent Writing in Astronomy.   term. Prerequisites: Ay 142.  This course is intended to be taken by students conducting minor study in the Ay option, subsequent to a term   who have completed a SURF with an astronomy faculty member and  are writing it up for publication. Students should sign up in the section  of the faculty member who supervised the research project. Course  requirements are (at minimum) bi-weekly meetings with the research  adviser and preparation of a 5-20 page write-up of the work in the style    Ge/Ay 159.  Astrobiology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ay 190. Computational Astrophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ph 20Œ22 (undergraduates).  Introduction to essential  numerical analysis and computational methods in astrophysics and  Astrophysics 490astrophysical data analysis. Basic numerical methods and techniques;  transport; reaction networks; data analysis methods; numerical relativity.   Ay/Ge 198.  Special Topics in the Planetary Sciences.   Topic for 2021-2022 is Extrasolar Planets. Thousands of   are now embarking on understanding the statistics of extrasolar planet populations and characterizing individual systems in detail, namely star-planet, planet-planet and planet-disk dynamical interactions, physical parameters of planets and their composition, weather phenomena, etc. Direct and indirect detection techniques are now completing the big pic-ture of extra-solar planetary systems in all of their natural diversity. The  seminar-style course will review the state of the art in exoplanet science, take up case studies, detail current and future instrument needs, and Ay 211. Contemporary Extragalactic Astronomy.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ay 123, Ay 124, and Ay 127.   astronomy and cosmology, including observational probes of dark mat -ter and dark energy; cosmological backgrounds and primordial element    the role of active galactic nuclei; galactic structure and stellar populations;   Ay 215.  Seminar in Theoretical Astrophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Course for graduate students and seniors in astronomy. Topic   pulsar binaries, magnetic and wind interactions, mergers, gravitational  waves. Students will be required to lead some discussions; homework    Ay 218. Extrasolar Planets.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.   2021-2022.Ay 219. Elements in the Universe and Galactic Chemical Evolu -tion. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ay 121, 123, 124, 126.  Survey of the formation of the elements in the universe as a function of cosmic time. Review of the determination of abundances in stars, meteorites, H II regions, and in interstellar and intergalactic gas. Over -view of models of galactic chemical evolution. Participants will measure  elemental abundances from the Keck spectrum of a star and construct   491BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR  BIOPHYSICSBi/BE/BMB 115. Viruses and Applications to Biological Systems.  9 units (3-2-4). For course description, see Biology. Ch/BMB 129. Introduction to Biophotonics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemistry. BMB/Bi/Ch 170.  Biochemistry and Biophysics of Macromolecules  and Molecular Assemblies.  Ch/Bi 110. Detailed analysis of the structures of the four classes of  biological molecules and the forces that shape them. Introduction to   2022.BMB/Bi/Ch 173. Biophysical/Structural Methods. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Basic principles of modern biophysical and structural  methods used to interrogate macromolecules from the atomic to cellular   NMR spectroscopy, single molecule techniques, circular dichroism, sur -face plasmon resonance, mass spectrometry, and molecular dynamics   BMB/Bi/Ch 174.  Advanced Topics in Biochemistry and Molecu -lar Biophysics. 6 units (3-0-3). First term. Prerequisites: Ch/Bi 110 or  equivalent. biophysics at Caltech. Development of skills in literature analysis and information synthesis. Instructor: Chong, Semlow, and guest lecturers. BMB/Ch 178. Macromolecular Function: kinetics, energetics, and  mechanisms.  equivalent. Discussion of the energetic principles and molecular mecha - -  including steady-state and pre-steadystate kinetics, kinetic simulations,   Bi/BMB 189. The Cell Cycle. 6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Biology. BMB/Ch 202 abc.  Biochemistry Seminar Course. -ond, third terms.  The course focuses on a seminar on selected topics from outside faculty on recent advances in biochemistry. Components  for each faculty visit include participation in a recitation, a formal dis -cussion section with visiting faculty, and attendance of the Biochemistry  seminar. Biochemistry Seminars take place 1-2 times per month (usually  Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics492Bi/BE/BMB 222. The Structure of the Cytosol. 6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Biology. BMB/Ch 230. Macromolecular Structure Determination with  Modern X-ray Crystallography Methods.  12 units (2-4-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.  Advanced course in macromo -lecular crystallography integrating lecture and laboratory treatment of   -  -tron), data reduction, multiple isomorphous replacement, single- and   -ture validation, coordinate deposition and structure presentation. In the   structure(s) determined by several methods, in parallel with lectures on  Bi/BMB 251 abc. Current Research in Cellular and Molecular Biol -ogy.  1 unit. For course description, see Biology.  BMB 278. Fundamentals of Molecular Genetics. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Principles and mechanisms of DNA repair and replication, tran - BMB 299. Graduate Research.  third terms.  Students may register for research units after consultation  with their adviser. BIOENGINEERINGBE 1.  Frontiers in Bioengineering.  A weekly seminar series by Caltech faculty providing an introduction to research direc - Engineers. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biology. BE 25. Biophysical Chemistry.  9 units; second term. Prerequisites:  Ch 1 ab, Ma 2. This course develops principles of solution thermody-namics, chemical kinetics, and transport processes applied to living  -librium steady states achieved through ATP consumption, and phase  493BE 98. Undergraduate Research in Bioengineering.  Variable units,   Undergraduate research with a written report at the end of each term; su -pervised by a Caltech faculty member, or co-advised by a Caltech faculty   BE 99 abc. Senior Thesis in Bioengineering. 6 or more units per    terms.  -sion. Research in Bioengineering, supervised by a Caltech faculty  member, culminating in a thesis. The topic is determined by the research  adviser and the student and is subject to approval by the Bioengineering   -ten report at the end of each term. The third term is taken on grades and     advising faculty member.  Instructor: Staff. BE/Bi 101. Order of Magnitude Biology.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  Prerequisites: none.  In this course, students will develop skills in the art of educated guesswork and apply them to the biological sciences.  biological systems by making inferences and generating hypotheses  about phenomena such as the rates and energy budgets of key biologi - molecular, cellular, organismal, communal, and planetary. Undergradu -  BE/Bi 103 a. Introduction to Data Analysis in the Biological Sci -ences.  equivalent; or instructor™s permission.  This course covers tools needed  presentation, basic image processing, and resampling-based statistical   -BE/Bi 103 b. Statistical Inference in the Biological Sciences.  9 units (1-3-5); second term. Prerequisites: BE/Bi 103 a or equivalent;  Ma 1 abc and Ma 3, or Bi/CNS/NB 195, or equivalent; or instructor™s  permission. This course introduces students to statistical modeling and  inference, primarily taking a Bayesian approach. Topics include genera -tive modeling, parameter estimation, model comparison, hierarchical  modeling, Markov chain Monte Carlo, graphical display of inference   All techniques are applied to real biological data sets in class and in  Bioengineering494BE/Bi 106. Comparative Biomechanics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Have you ever wondered how a penguin swims or why a maple seed    these and other questions related to the physical design of plants and  animals. The course will provide a basic introduction to how engineering      not cover medically-related biomechanics. Topics include the physical  properties of biological materials, viscoelasticity, muscle mechanics,  BE 107. Exploring Biological Principles Through Bio-Inspired  Design. 9 units (3-5-1); third term. Prerequisites: none.  Students will   will work in small teams in which they build a hardware platform that   architecture is used to implement a given behavior. Alternatively, the    topics include bio-inspired control of motion (from bacteria to insects),  processing of sensory information (molecules to neurons), and robust -  be used to demonstrate and evaluate the mechanism, and building a computer-controlled, electro-mechanical system in the lab that imple - - ChE/BE/MedE 112. Creativity and Technological Innovation with   9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.Bi/BE/BMB 115. Viruses and Applications to Biological Systems.  9 units (3-2-4). For course description, see Biology. Ph/APh/EE/BE 118 ab.  Physics of Measurement. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Physics.Ge/Bi/BE/CNS/ESE 147. Challenges and Opportunities in Quantita-tive Ecology.  3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.BE 150. Biological Circuit Design.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prereq -uisites: Bi 1, Bi 8, or equivalent; Ma 2, Bi/CNS/NB 195, or equivalent; or instructor™s permission.  Quantitative studies of cellular and devel- circuits controlling microbial behaviors and multicellular development  495  operation, as well as higher-level circuit properties, such as robustness.   protein-protein interaction networks at the genomic scale. Topics are   -BE 153. Case Studies in Systems Physiology.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Bi 8, Bi 9, or equivalent.   the process of creating and validating theoretical models in systems   - -ogy, cardiovascular physiology, and others. Emphasis will be placed on  understanding how macroscopic behavior emerges from the interaction  NB/Bi/BE 155. Neuropharmacology.  6 units (3-0-3). For course de-scription, see Neurobiology. BE 159. Signal Transduction and Mechanics in Morphogenesis.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Bi 8, Bi 9, ACM 95/100 ab,  or instructor™s permission.  biochemical pathways that govern morphogenesis. Topics include   migration in tissue development and regeneration. The course empha - BE/APh 161. Physical Biology of the Cell. 12 units (3-0-9); second term. Prerequisites: Ph 2 ab and ACM 95/100 ab, or background in dif -ferential equations and statistical and quantum mechanics, or instruc -tor™s written permission.  Physical models applied to the analysis of biological structures ranging from individual proteins and DNA to entire  cells. Topics include the force response of proteins and DNA, models  of molecular motors, DNA packing in viruses and eukaryotes, mechan- Phillips. ChE/BE 163. Introduction to Biomolecular Engineering.  12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.MedE/EE/BE 168 abc. Biomedical Optics: Principles and Imaging. 9 units (4-0-5). For course description, see Medical Engineering.Bi/BE 177. Principles of Modern Microscopy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biology. Bi/BE 182. Design Principles of Gene Regulatory Networks. 6 units . For course description, see Biology. Bioengineering496Bi/BE/CS 183. Introduction to Computational Biology and Bioinfor -matics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biology. EE/BE/MedE 185. MEMS Technology and Devices.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.ChE/BE/MedE 188. Molecular Imaging. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.BE/EE/MedE 189 ab. Design and Construction of Biodevices. 189 a,   Prerequisites: BE/EE/MedE  189 a must be taken before BE/EE/MedE 189 b.  Students will learn  to use an Arduino micro-controller to interface sensing and actuation  hardware with the computer. Students will learn and practice engineer -ing design principles through a set of projects. In part a, students will  design and implement biosensing systems, including a pulse monitor,   Part b is a student-initiated design project requiring instructor™s permis -  BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 ab. Biomolecular Computation. 9 units (3-0-6) second term; (2-4-3) third term. Prerequisites: none. Recommended:  ChE/BE 163, CS 21, CS 129 ab, or equivalent. This course investigates -  of, and reasoning about abstract models of chemical reaction networks,  molecular folding, molecular self-assembly, and molecular motors, with  an emphasis on universal architectures for computation, control, and  construction within molecular systems. If time permits, we will also dis-regulatory networks, and the cytoskeleton; physical limits of computa -tion, reversibility, reliability, and the role of noise, DNA-based computers  and DNA nanotechnology. Part a develops fundamental results; part   discussed, and students will do projects on current research topics.   BE/CS 196 ab. Design and Construction of Programmable Molecu -lar Systems. a = 12 units (2-4-6) second term; b = 9 units (2-4-3) third  term. Prerequisites: none.  This course will introduce students to the  conceptual frameworks and tools of computer science as applied to  -ing and testing their designs in the laboratory. In part a, students will  design and construct DNA circuits and self-assembled DNA nanostruc -  spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy and will use software tools  and program in Mathematica. Part b is an open-ended design and build  497project requiring instructor™s permission for enrollment. Enrollment in  -BE/Bi/CNS/NB 197. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year; taken in any term. In consultation with, and with the approval of, a faculty advisor and the Caltech Center for Teaching,  Learning, and Outreach. Students may obtain credit for engaging in   and tutor young people and underserved populations; or to otherwise   outreach activity forms to describe their proposal and to report on the  results. Students may petition their option representative (graduate stu -dents) or academic advisor (undergraduate students) if they seek credits   BE 200. Research in Bioengineering.  Units and term to be arranged.  students are directed in bioengineering research.  BE 201.  Reading the Bioengineering Literature.  4 units (1-0-3); sec-ond term. Participants will read, discuss, and critique papers on diverse   - BE/Bi/NB 203. Introduction to Programming for the Biological  Sciences Bootcamp. 6 units; summer term. Prerequisites: none.  This course provides an intensive, hands-on, pragmatic introduction to com -puter programming aimed at biologists and bioengineers. No previous   -tion. Students will learn basic concepts such as data types, control   code applied to biological problems. At the end of the course, students  will be able to perform simple simulations, write scripts to run software  -fered as a week-long summer ﬁboot campﬂ the week after Commence -ment, in which students spend all day working on the course. Students who do not have a strong need for the condensed boot camp schedule   -BE/Bi 205. Deep Learning for Biological Data.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: BE/BI 103 a and BE/BI 103 b or equivalent; or  instructor™s permission.  CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155 is strongly recom -mended but not required.  This course is a practical introduction to ma -chine learning methods for biological data, focusing on three common  data types in biology-images, sequences, and structures. This course  will cover how to represent biological data in a manner amenable to  machine learning approaches, survey tasks that can be solved with  modern deep learning algorithms (e.g. image segmentation, object  Bioengineering498 -tures of deep learning models for each data type, and provide practical  guidance for model development. Students will have the opportunity to   Bi/BE/BMB 222. The Structure of the Cytosol.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Biology. Bi/BE 227. Methods in Modern Microscopy.  12 units (2-6-4). For course description, see Biology. Bi/CNS/BE/NB 230. Optogenetic and CLARITY Methods in Experi-mental Neuroscience.  9 units (3-2-4). For course description, see Biology.  BE 240. Special Topics in Bioengineering.  Units and term to be ar-ranged. Topics relevant to the general educational goals of the bioengi -Bi/BE/CNS/NB 241. Spatial Genomics. For course description, see Biology.  Ae/BE 242. Biological Flows: Propulsion.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. MedE/BE/Ae 243. Physiological Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Medical Engineering.BE 262. Physical Biology Bootcamp. 12 units (2-10-0); summer term. Prerequisites: Enrollment limited to incoming Biology, Biochemistry  and Molecular Biophysics, Bioengineering, and Neurobiology graduate  students, or instructor™s permission.  This course provides an intensive  introduction to thinking like a quantitative biologist. Every student  will build a microscope from scratch, use a confocal microscope to     -   mathematicsﬂ to perform order of magnitude estimates on problems  ranging from how many photons it takes to make a cyanobacterium to    BE 267. Research Topics in Bioengineering.   term. - Introduction to current research topics in Caltech bioengineering labs. Graded pass/fail. Instructor: Staff. 499Bi/BE/Ch/ChE/Ge 269. Integrative Projects in Microbial Science and  Engineering. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biology. BIOLOGYBi 1. Principles of BiologyŠThe great theories of biology and their   9 units (4-0-5); third term.  There are   of the gene, and the theory of evolution. Each of them has had major  -cine, forensic DNA testing, and modern agriculture. Each theory will be  discussed from its 19th century origin to its standing in the 21st century,  sampled. The course will also ask if there is yet a theory of the brain,  and if not, how one might be framed. The course is designed to teach what technically adept members of society should know about biology.   Bi 1 x. The Great Ideas of Biology: Exploration through Experimen -tation. 9 units (0-6-3); third term.  Introduction to concepts and labora -tory methods in biology. Molecular biology techniques and advanced   course is intended for nonbiology majors and will satisfy the freshman   Bi 2. Current Research in Biology.  Intended for students considering the biology option; open to freshmen. Current  research in biology will be discussed, on the basis of reading assigned  in advance of the discussions, with members of the divisional faculty.  Bi 8. Foundational Principles of Molecular Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course and its sequel, Bi 9, cover biology at the molecular and cellular levels. Bi 8 emphasizes genomic structure and the mechanisms responsible for the transmission and expression of ge-netic information. The focus is on the ways that the information content  gene expression and protein function. Assignments will include critical  dissections of papers from classical and current research literature and problem sets. Instructors: Guttman, Hong.Bi 9. Cell Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Bi 8.  Contin- -toplasmic structure, membrane structure and function, cell motility, and  cell-cell recognition. Emphasis on both the ultrastructural and biochemi -  Varshavsky . Biology500Bi 10. Introductory Biology Laboratory.  6 units (1-3-2); third term.  Prerequisites: Bi 8; designed to be taken concurrently with Bi 9.  An introduction to molecular, cellular, and biochemical techniques that are  commonly used in studies of biological systems at the molecular level.  Bi 21. Undergraduate Research with Presentation.  Minimum 12 units  Special problems involving  laboratory research in biology; to be arranged with instructors before  registration. Must give a public presentation reporting results of work.  May be counted as advanced lab credit. May be repeated for credit.  In-Bi 22. Undergraduate Research.  third terms.  Special problems involving laboratory research in biology;   Bi 23. Biology Tutorials.  3 or 6 units; second term. Small group study  and discussion in depth of special areas or problems in biology or  biological engineering, involving regular tutorial sections with instructors   winter term. To be arranged with instructors before registration. Graded  Engineers. 6 units (3-0-3); third term.  and practice in writing and speaking relevant to professional biological    -nal, either based on their previous research or written as a review paper    each student, to provide feedback on the content and style of the     Bi 90 abc. Undergraduate Thesis.   -ond, third terms. Prerequisites: 18 units of Bi 22 (or equivalent research  experience) in the research area proposed for the thesis, and instructor™s  permission.  Bi 22 into a coherent individual research project, carried out under the  supervision of a member of the biology faculty. Normally involves three  or more consecutive terms of work in the junior and senior years. The  student will formulate a research problem based in part on work already    Kennedy.  501BE/Bi 101. Order of Magnitude Biology.  6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Bioengineering.CNS/Psy/Bi 102 ab. Brains, Minds, and Society.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.BE/Bi 103 a. Introduction to Data Analysis in the Biological Sci -ences. 9 units (1-3-5). For course description, see Bioengineering.BE/Bi 103 b. Statistical Inference in the Biological Sciences.  9 units (1-3-5). For course description, see Bioengineering.Bi/Ge/ESE 105. Evolution. 12 units (3-4-5); second term. Prerequisites:  Completion of Core Curriculum Courses. Maximum enrollment: 15, by  application only.  The theory of evolution is arguably biology™s greatest  idea and serves as the overarching framework for thinking about the  diversity and relationships between organisms. This course will present  a broad picture of evolution starting with discussions of the insights of  the great naturalists, the study of the genetic basis of variation, and an  introduction to the key driving forces of evolution. Following these foun -dations, we will then focus on a number of case studies including the   - -nally human evolution and the impact of humans on evolution (including  these issues will be the island biogeography of the Galapagos. Instruc- BE/Bi 106. Comparative Biomechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Bioengineering.ChE/Ch/Bi/SEC 107. Social Media for Scientists. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.Ch/Bi 110. Introduction to Biochemistry.  12 units (4-0-8). For course description, see Chemistry. Ch/Bi 111. Biochemistry of Gene Expression.  12 units (4-0-8). For course description, see Chemistry. Bi 114. Immunology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Bi 8,  Bi 9, Bi 122 or equivalent, and Ch/Bi 110 recommended.  The course will cover the molecular and cellular mechanisms that mediate recognition  and response in the mammalian immune system. Topics include cellular  and humoral immunity, the structural basis of immune recognition, an -tigen presentation and processing, gene rearrangement of lymphocyte  receptors, cytokines and the regulation of cellular responses, T and B  cell development, and mechanisms of tolerance. The course will present  Biology502an integrated view of how the immune system interacts with viral and  Bi/BE/BMB 115. Viruses and Applications to Biological Systems.  9 units (3-2-4); third term.  Learn about viruses as fascinating biologi -cal machines, focusing on naturally-occurring and evolved variants, in silico viral vector engineering, and computational methods that include  their engineerable properties for use in basic research and translational   non-mammalian (plant, bacteria) viruses, enveloped vs. non-enveloped viruses, host-virus interactions, viral life cycles (replication vs. dorman - -try and replication, the application of viruses as gene-delivery vehicles  (with a focus on adeno-associated viruses or AAVs, lentiviruses, and  rabies), and how to engineer viral properties for applications in basic  research and gene therapy. The lectures will be complemented by short     Bi 116. Microbial Genetics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Bi 1, 8, 9 (or equivalent), and ESE/Bi 166. A course on microbial   microbial genomes (primarily bacterial, but we will also cover archaea  and microbial eukaryotes). The power of microbial genetics to shed light     Bi 117. Developmental Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Bi 8 and Bi 9. A survey of the development of multicellular organ -  into germ layers (gastrulation), induction of the nervous system (neurula- placed on the molecular mechanisms underlying morphogenetic move- both classical and modern approaches to studying these processes.    Bi 118. Morphogenesis of Developmental Systems. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Bi 8 and Bi 9, or instructor™s permission.  Lectures on and discussion of how cells, tissues, and organs take   -during migration; the relationship between cell migration and metasta - -503onic development of invertebrate and vertebrate animals. Students will choose term project involving writing a grant proposal or quantitative    Bi 122. Genetics. . Prerequisite: Bi 8 or Bi 9, or  instructor™s permission.  Lecture and discussion course covering basic   Bi/BE 129. The Biology and Treatment of Cancer.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.  of cancer, covering oncogenes, tumor suppressors, tumor cell biology,  metastasis, tumor angiogenesis, and other topics. The second part will concern newer information on cancer genetics and other topics, taught  from the primary research literature. The last part of the course will  concern treatments, including chemotherapy, anti-angiogenic therapy,     CNS/Psy/Bi 131. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.Bi 145 a. Tissue and Organ Physiology.  Prerequisites: Bi 8, 9, Ch/Bi 110. Ch/Bi 110 may be taken concurrently.  Reviews of anatomy and histology, as well as in-depth discussion of  cellular physiology. Building from cell function to tissues, the course   topics include endocrine physiology, the autonomic nervous system,  urinary physiology, and the cardiovascular system. Particular emphasis  is placed on health issues and pharmaceutical therapy from both a   Bi 145 b. Tissue and Organ Physiology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Bi 145a.  anatomy and cellular physiology. Topics include muscle physiology, the  skeletal system, digestive and hepatic physiology, nutrition, the respira -tory system and reproductive physiology. Particular emphasis is placed  on health issues and pharmaceutical therapy from both a research and   Ge/Bi/BE/CNS/ESE 147. Challenges and Opportunities in Quantita-tive Ecology.  3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.NB/Bi/CNS 150. Introduction to Neuroscience.  10 units (4-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology.  Biology504NB/Bi/CNS 152. Neural Circuits and Physiology of Appetite and  Body Homeostasis. 6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Neuro -biology. NB/Bi/CNS 154. Principles of Neuroscience. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/BE 155. Neuropharmacology.  6 units (3-0-3). For course de-scription, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 157. Comparative Nervous Systems. . For course description, see Neurobiology.  Bi/CNS 158. Vertebrate Evolution.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prereq -uisites: Bi 1, Bi 8, or instructor™s permission.  An integrative approach to  the study of vertebrate evolution combining comparative anatomical, behavioral, embryological, genetic, paleontological, and physiologi-of developmental programs in evolution; (2) homeostatic systems for     Bi 160. Molecular Basis of Animal Evolution. 9 units (3-3-3); third  term. Prerequisites: Bi 8 and/or Bi 9 recommended.  We share the planet  with well over 1.5 million other animal species. This course covers how the staggering diversity of the animal kingdom came about through  underlying molecular evolutionary phenomena, including gene and protein sequence evolution, gene family and genome evolution, the  evolution of developmental processes, neural circuit evolution and  behavior, and molecular mechanisms that physiologically adapt animals  to their environment. Molecular processes involved in speciation will  the production of selectable variation that have shaped the evolution of  animal life. Participants will undertake a laboratory project on evolution -genome analysis. The course focuses on the >99.9% of animals that  Pl/CNS/NB/Bi/Psy 161. Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Philosophy. NB/Bi/CNS 162. Cellular and Systems Neuroscience Laboratory.  . For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 163. The Biological Basis of Neural Disorders.  6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 164. Tools of Neurobiology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. 505Bi 165. Microbiology Research: Practice and Proposal.  6 units (2-3- The course will serve to introduce graduate students to 1)   funding applications; 2) ongoing research projects on campus involving     of the class will involve training in grant writing by drafting an NSF-GRFP proposal. The second half of the class will involve giving chalk  talk research presentations. Students can apply from all departments;  priority will be given to those in microbiology. Enrollment is limited to   ESE/Bi 166. Microbial Physiology.  9 units (3-1-5). For course descrip-tion, see Environmental Science and Engineering. ESE/Bi 168. Microbial Metabolic Diversity.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.  BMB/Bi/Ch 170. Biochemistry and Biophysics of Macromolecules  and Molecular Assemblies. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics. BMB/Bi/Ch 173. Biophysical/Structural Methods. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.BMB/Bi/Ch 174. Advanced Topics in Biochemistry and Biophys -ics. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.CNS/Bi/Psy/NB 176. Cognition. 9 units (4-0-5). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Bi/BE 177. Principles of Modern Microscopy.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Lectures and discussions on the underlying principles behind   and two-photon microscopy. The course will begin with basic geometric    -include critical evaluation of published images and design strategies for simple optical systems and the analysis and presentation of two- and  three-dimensional images. The role of light microscopy in the history of  science will be an underlying theme. No prior knowledge of microscopy   - Ge/ESE/Bi 178. Microbial Ecology.  . For course descrip-tion, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Biology506Bi 180. Plant and Soil Science.  Plants comprise most of the mass of living things on land, serve as the ultimate source of almost all human food and energy, and are a dominating force  in the carbon and oxygen cycles. This lecture, reading and lab course  will introduce topics in plant systematics, evolution, genetics, genomics, development, and ecology, with emphasis on plant interactions with soil  and the bacteria, fungi, and animals that inhabit it. Students from all op-tions are welcome. Instructor: Meyerowitz.Bi/BE 182. Design Principles of Gene Regulatory Networks. 6 units This course is focused on the genomic regulatory networks that direct developmental processes. We  will discuss concepts that have contributed to our current understanding of gene regulatory networks and their importance in understanding the development and evolution of the animal body plan. Topics will include  the developmental control of gene expression, transcriptional control systems, and experimental as well as computational approaches to net-work analysis. Examples that will be discussed include circuits and net-works that operate in mammalian, sea urchin, and Drosophila systems. Instructor: Peter.   Bi/BE/CS 183. Introduction to Computational Biology and Bioinfor -matics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Bi 8, CS 2, Ma 3; or  BE/Bi 103a; or instructor™s permission.  Biology is becoming an increas -ingly data-intensive science. Many of the data challenges in the biologi-  probabilistic, and statistical methods that are common in computational  biology and bioinformatics. We will integrate these theoretical aspects  to discuss solutions to common challenges that reoccur throughout  bioinformatics including algorithms and heuristics for tackling DNA se-quence alignments, phylogenetic reconstructions, evolutionary analysis,  and population and human genetics. We will discuss these topics in  conjunction with common applications including the analysis of high   Bi/CNS/NB 184. The Primate Visual System.  9 units (3-1-5); third  term. This class focuses on the primate visual system, investigating it    -ing in the retina, and ending in the frontal lobe, with a special emphasis  placed on mechanisms for high-level vision in the parietal and temporal lobes. An important aspect of the course is the lab component in which  Bi/CNS/NB 185. Large Scale Brain Networks.  6 units (2-0-4); third  term. This class will focus on understanding what is known about the   507  scale networks revealed by anatomical tracing, functional connectivity    -sensory integration, decision making, and object vision. While each of these topics could cover an entire course in itself, our focus will be on  understanding the master plan Šhow the components of each of these systems are put together and function as a whole. A key question we    will discuss the communication through coherence hypothesis, small    CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. Vision: From Computational Theory to  Neuronal Mechanisms.  12 units (4-4-4). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187. Neural Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Bi 188. Human Genetics and Genomics. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  Prerequisite: Bi 122; or graduate standing and instructor™s permis -sion. Introduction to the genetics of humans. Subjects covered include  human genome structure, genetic diseases and predispositions, the  human genome project, forensic use of human genetic markers, human    Bi/BMB 189. The Cell Cycle. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  Prerequisites:  Bi 8 and Bi 9. The course covers the mechanisms by which eukaryotic cells control their duplication in a properly regulated manner. A large  emphasis will be placed on the controls that cells employ to replicate  and segregate their chromosomes with the necessary precision. In addi -rectify damaged DNA throughout the cell cycle. These various pro -cesses, collectively known as checkpoint-regulatory mechanisms, lie at  the heart of how organisms maintain genomic integrity throughout their  lifetimes. These pathways are essential for the prevention of cancer,  birth defects, and other maladies. As part of the course, students will  papers and newer papers that employ cutting-edge technologies. In- Bi 190. Systems Genetics.  Prerequisites: Bi  122. Lectures covering how genetic and genomic analyses are used to  understand biological systems. Emphasis is on genetic and genome- and mice to elucidate the function of genes, genetic pathways and Biology508 BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 ab. Biomolecular Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Bioengineering.Bi 192. Introduction to Systems Biology.  Prerequisites: Ma 1abc, and either Bi 8, CS1, or ACM 95 or instructor™s  permission.  from a systems-level point of view. Given what biological systems must  do and the constraints they face, what general properties must biologi -  deconstrain, robustness, optimality, and evolvability. The class will read  seminar with active discussion from all students. Students from multiple   in learning systems-level questions in biology. Limited enrollment.   Bi/CNS/NB 195. Mathematics in Biology.  term. Prerequisites: calculus.  This course develops the mathematical methods needed for a quantitative understanding of biological phe-nomena, including data analysis, formulation of simple models, and the  -chastic processes, linear algebra and transforms, dynamical systems,   BE/Bi/CNS/NB 197. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year; taken in any term. For course description, see Bioengineering.BE/Bi/NB 203. Introduction to Programming for the Biological Sci -ences Bootcamp. 6 units. For course description, see Bioengineering.BE/Bi 205. Deep Learning for Biological Data.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Bioengineering. Bi 206. Biochemical and Genetic Methods in Biological Research.  6 units (2-0-4); third term. Prerequisites: graduate standing.  This course will comprise discussions of selected methods in molecular biology   Bi 214. Stem Cells and Hematopoiesis. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Graduate standing, or at least one of Bi 114, Bi 117, Bi/ Be 182, plus molecular biology.  An advanced course with classes based on active discussion, lectures, and seminar presentations. Development  from embryos and development from stem cells are distinct paradigms  for understanding and manipulating the emergence of ordered biologi - 509features of stem-cell based systems, ranging from the natural physi -ological stem cells that are responsible for life-long hematopoiesis in   Key questions will be how the stem cells encode multipotency, how  they can enter long-term self-renewal by separating themselves from  the developmental clock that controls development of the rest of the or -    from common stem cells, the role of cytokines and cytokine receptors in   -  NB/Bi/CNS 216. Behavior of Mammals. For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 217. Central Mechanisms in Perception. . For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 220. Genetic Dissection of Neural Circuit Function. 6 . For course description, see Neurobiology. Bi/BE/BMB 222. The Structure of the Cytosol. term.  -cal discipline. once envisioned as a concentrated soup of proteins, RNA, and small molecules, all diffusing, mixing freely, and interacting randomly. We  now know that proteins in the cytosol frequently undergo only restricted diffusion and become concentrated in specialized portions of the cytosol  to carry out particular cellular functions. This course consists of lectures,  reading, student presentations, and discussion about newly recog-nized biochemical mechanisms that confer local structure and reaction  Kennedy. Bi/BE 227. Methods in Modern Microscopy.  12 units (2-6-4); second term. Prerequisites: Bi/BE 177 or a course in microscopy.  Discussion and laboratory-based course covering the practical use of the confocal microscope, with special attention to the dynamic analysis of living cells  and embryos. Course will begin with basic optics, microscope design,  Koehler illumination, and the principles of confocal microscopy as well  -cence microscopy (also called single plane illumination microscopy,  SPIM). During the class students will construct a light sheet microscope  based on the openSPIM design. Alongside the building of a light sheet microscope, the course will consist of semi-independent modules orga - Biology510Early modules will include a lab using lenses to build a cloaking device. Most of the early modules will focus on three-dimensional reconstruc -the microscopes in the Beckman Institute Biological Imaging Facil -   Bi/CNS/BE/NB 230. Optogenetic and CLARITY Methods in Experi-mental Neuroscience.  9 units (3-2-4); third term. Prerequisites: Gradu -ate standing or NB/Bi/CNS 150 or equivalent or instructor™s permission.  The class covers the theoretical and practical aspects of using (1) opto - -  to neurons, recording of light-modulated activity, and tissue clearing,    (genetic targeting, viral transduction), light activation requirements   modalities (electrophysiology, imaging); design and use of methods for   - and macromolecule access). Class will discuss applications of these  methods to neuronal circuits (case studies based on recent literature).   Bi/BE/CNS/NB 241. Spatial Genomics.  -  Maximum enrollment: 12. Applica-tions of spatial genomics technology to various biological samples. Projects  will be selected to represent problems in neurobiology, developmental  biology and translational medicine. Emphasis will be placed on generating  experimental data and analysis of data with machine learning algorithms  for segmentation and clustering cells with single cell genomics tools, and  preparation for publication. Instructor: Cai. Ge/Bi 244. Paleobiology Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3). For course descrip-tion, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Ge/Bi/ESE 246. Molecular Geobiology Seminar.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. CNS/Bi/NB 247. Cerebral Cortex.  6 units (2-0-4). For course descrip-tion, see Computation and Neural Systems. Ge/ESE/Bi 248. Environmental Justice.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.511Bi 250 a. Topics in Molecular and Cellular Biology.   term. Prerequisites: graduate standing.  Lectures and literature-based   research strategies and general principles of modern biology. Students   biology, developmental biology, genetics and neuroscience. Graded   Bi 250 b. Topics in Systems Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Pre -requisites: Bi 1, Bi 8, or equivalent; Ma 2, Bi/CNS/NB 195, or equiva -lent; or instructor™s permission.  Quantitative studies of cellular and  circuits controlling microbial behaviors and multicellular development    operation, as well as higher-level circuit properties, such as robustness.   protein-protein interaction networks at the genomic scale. Topics are   -Bi 250 d. Topics in Developmental, Stem Cell and Evolutionary  Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: graduate stand -ing. Lectures and literature-based discussions on the principles and     NB/Bi/CNS 250 c. Topics in Systems Neuroscience.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. Bi/BMB 251 abc. Current Research in Cellular and Molecular Biol -ogy.  1 unit. Prerequisite: graduate standing.  Presentations and discus -sion of research at Caltech in biology and chemistry. Discussions of    Bi 252. Responsible Conduct of Research.  This lecture and discussion course covers relevant aspects of the re -sponsible conduct of biomedical and biological research. Topics include  guidelines and regulations, ethical and moral issues, research miscon -duct, data management and analysis, research with animal or human   advancement. Undergraduate students with junior and senior standing   Ch/Bi 253. Advanced Topics in Biochemistry.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Chemistry.  Psy/Bi/CNS 255. Topics in Emotion and Social Cognition.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Psychology.  Biology512CNS/Bi/NB 256. Decision Making. 6 units (2-0-4). For course descrip-tion, see Computation and Neural Systems.Bi 270 abc. Special Topics in Biology.  Units to be arranged each term;  Students may register with permission of the respon -sible faculty member. CNS/Bi 286 abc. Special Topics in Computation and Neural Sys -tems. Units to be arranged. For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.Bi 299. Graduate Research.   terms. Students may register for research units after consultation with  their adviser. BUSINESS, ECONOMICS, AND  MANAGEMENTBEM/Ec/PS 80. Frontiers in Social Sciences. term. Weekly seminar by a member of the Caltech Social Sciences  faculty to discuss a topic of their current research or teaching at an introductory level. The course can be used to learn more about different  areas of study and about undergraduate courses within the Social Sci-ences. The course will also be useful to those interested in pursuing the  BEM, EC or PS options, or participating in research (SURF, for example)  under supervision of the Social Science faculty. The students will be  asked to write a discussion of each seminar presentation. Graded pass/fail. Instructor: Cvitanic.BEM 97. Undergraduate Research.  Units to be arranged; any term. Prerequisites: advanced BEM and instructor™s permission.  This course   BEM 101. Selected Topics in Business Economics and Manage -ment. Units to be determined by arrangement with the instructor;    BEM 102. Introduction to Accounting.  This   statements are (sources of information about a company), what they     513BEM 103. Introduction to Finance.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Pre -requisites: Ec 11 required; Ma 1 abc recommended (to be familiar with  calculus and linear algebra). decisions, we will discuss topics like prices, risk, and return, portfolio     -ent value approach, and mergers and acquisitions). In addition, if time   BEM 104. Investments. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ec  11, BEM 103, some familiarity with statistics.  BEM 105. Options.  the following: Ec 122, Ge/ESE 118, Ma 1/103, MA 112a, MA 112b, or instructor™s permission; BEM 103 strongly recommended; some familiar - An introduction to option pricing  theory and risk management in the discrete-time, bi-nomial tree model,  and the continuous time Black-Scholes-Merton framework. Both the  will cover the basics of Stochastic, Ito Calculus. Since 2015, the course  lectures online, while problem solving and case and paper presentations   BEM 107. Corporate Finance. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite:  BEM 103. The main objective of the course is to develop insight into the   -tive project evaluation for investment, choice between borrowing and   and acquisitions). Theory, empirical evidence, and case analysis all     BEM 108. Mathematical Models in Fintech. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Some knowledge of game theory and optimization  is helpful, BEM 103 Introduction to Finance is recommended, and a  calculus-based course in probability is required.  In this course we will Business, Economics, and Management514go over recent works on topics broadly contained in the newly emerging   of strategic actions of agents interacting via a blockchain technology,  via crowdfunding platforms, and via online investment platforms (ﬁrobo-  BEM 110. Venture Capital.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: BEM 102, 103. An introduction to the theory and practice of   -ing economic principles and theoretical models relevant to the venture  investment process, as well as the standard practices used by industry    BEM 111.  Quantitative Risk and Portfolio Management. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: GE/ACM 118, BEM 105, or Ma  112. Investors demand reward for taking risk. Concepts of Knightian risk and uncertainty; risk preference (risk-neutral Q vs. real-world P prob -ability measures); coherent risk; and commonly used metrics for risk are  construction is described, along with the drawbacks of this approach in practice and methods for addressing these drawbacks. The leptokurtic  surprises are covered, leading to inherently leptokurtic techniques for estimating volatility and correlation. Scenario analysis, and regime-switching methods are shown to provide ways of dealing with risk in ex-treme environments. The special nature of modeling long/short portfolios  (hedge funds) is explored. The text for the class is a Jupyter Notebook  with Python code segments. Instructor: Winston.BEM 112. International Financial Markets.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: BEM 103 or instructor permission.  behavior, and their inter-relations. The principal focus will be on assets   derivatives. Attention will be devoted to (1) institutional arrangements,   (5) derivative instruments, (6) hedging, (7) dynamic investment strate-gies, (8) other topics of particular current relevance and importance. Not   BEM 117. Behavioral Finance. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequi -site: Students are recommended (but not required) to take BEM 103 to  Much of modern   - and studies models in which some agents are less than fully rational.  515undo the dislocations caused by less rational traders; and psychology, which provides guidance for the kinds   BEM/Ec/ESE 119. Environmental Economics.  term. Prerequisite: Ec 11 or equivalent.  This course provides a survey  from the perspective of economics of public policy issues regarding the  management of natural resources and the protection of environmental  quality. The course covers both conceptual topics and recent and cur -rent applications. Included are principles of environmental and resource  economics, management of nonrenewable and renewable resources,  and environmental policy with the focus on air pollution problems, both  local problems (smog) and global problems (climate change). Not of -fered 2021-2022.  CHEMICAL ENGINEERINGCh/ChE 9. Chemical Synthesis and Characterization for Chemical Engineering. 9 units (1-6-2). For course description, see Chemistry.  ChE 10. Introduction to Chemical Engineering. term. This course will introduce the Chemical Engineering discipline, career options and research opportunities through lectures and panel discussions by faculty and alumni. Graded pass/fail.ChE 15. Introduction to Chemical Engineering Computation. 9 second term. Introduction to the solution of engineering problems through the use of the computer. Elementary programming in  Python is taught, and applied to solving chemical engineering problems in data analysis, process simulation, and optimization. No previous knowledge of computer programming is assumed. Instructor: Flagan.ChE 62. Separation Processes.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prereq -uisites: ChE 15 and Ma 2. Equilibrium staged separations. Membrane - ChE 63 ab. Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics. 9 units (3-0-6);   A comprehensive treatment of classical thermodynamics with engineering and chemical applications. First and second laws. Applications to closed  and open systems. Equations of state. Thermochemical calculations.  -and models of nonideal solutions. Chemical potential. Phase and chemi-cal reaction equilibria. Instructors: Flagan, Ismagilov. Chemical Engineering516ChE 70. Special Topics in Chemical Engineering.  Units by arrange-ment; terms to be arranged.   Spe-cial problems or courses arranged to meet the emerging needs of under- Competition. May be repeated for credit, as content may vary. Grading   ChE 80. Undergraduate Research.  Units by arrangement, instructor™s  permission required.   ChE 90 abc. Senior Thesis.  A research project carried out under the mentorship of an approved faculty  and chemical engineering senior thesis coordinator. In addition, students  must submit the following to the thesis mentor and chemical engineering senior thesis coordinator: a midterm progress report in each term; end-draft in the third term. A grade will not be assigned prior to completion of  the thesis, which normally takes three terms. A P grade will be given for  the end of the course. 3 units (2-0-1). For course description, see Chemistry.  ChE 101. Chemical Reaction Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ChE 62, ChE 63 ab, ChE 103 a or instructor™s  permission. Elements of chemical kinetics and chemically reacting  systems. Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. Chemical reactor   ChE 103 abc. Transport Phenomena.  third terms.  Prerequisites: ACM 95/100 ab or concurrent registration;  ChE 101 required for ChE 103 c or instructor™s permission.  A rigor-  -  (a), Shapiro (b, c). ChE 105. Dynamics and Control of Chemical Systems.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: ACM 95 ab or concurrent registration, or  instructor™s permission.  Analysis of linear dynamic systems. Feedback control. Stability of closed-loop control systems. Root locus, Frequency  response, and Nyquist analysis. Feedforward, cascade, and multivari - ChE/Ch/Bi/SEC 107. Social Media for Scientists. 9 units (3-0-6); second term.517communication. Social media platforms are discussed in the context of audiences. Topics will include ethics, privacy, reputation management,  ownership and the law, and will focus on the use and impact of social  media for personal and professional career development. Lectures will include presentations by invited experts in various specialties, a number of whom will have worldwide recognition. Not offered 2021-2022. ChE/ESE/ME/MS 111. Sustainable Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term.     resources including fresh water, nitrogen, carbon and other biogeochem -ical cycles that impose planetary constraints on engineering; systems approaches to sustainable development goals; fossil fuel formation, chemical composition, production and use; engineering challenges and opportunities in decarbonizing energy, transportation and industry; global  -ter-energy nexus; analysis of regional and local systems to model effects   ChE/BE/MedE 112. Creativity and Technological Innovation with Mi - 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course combines three parts. First, it will cover fundamental aspects of kinetics, mass-Second, it will provide an understanding of how new technologies are invented and reduced to practice. Finally, students in the course will   creativity. Students will be encouraged and helped, but not required, to  develop their inventions further by working with OTT and entrepreneurial  -ment of students with diverse backgrounds and interests. For chemical engineers, suggested but not required courses are ChE 101 (Chemical Reaction Engineering) and ChE 103 abc (Transport Phenomena). Stu -dents are encouraged to contact the instructor to discuss enrollment. In-structor: Ismagilov. ChE 114. Solid State NMR Spectroscopy For Materials Chemistry.  9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 21abc or instructor™s per -mission. Principles and applications of solid state NMR spectroscopy   - the areas of heterogeneous catalysts, batteries, energy storage materi -  NMR of quadrupole nuclei, multiple pulse and multi-dimensional solid provided via separate laboratory sessions using solid NMR spectrom - Chemical Engineering518ChE 115. Electronic Materials Processing.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 103 abc, ChE 101, or instructor™s permis -sion. Introduction into the gas-phase processing techniques used in the  fabrication of electronic materials and devices. Kinetic theory of gases.  Surface chemistry and gas-surface interaction dynamics. Film deposi- plasmas and their role in patterned etching and layer deposition. Charg -ing damage during plasma processing. Determination of key parameters   2021-2022.ChE 118. Introduction to the Design of Chemical Systems.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 101, ChE 103 abc,  ChE 126, or instructor™s permission.  Short-term, open-ended projects  that require students to design a chemical process or product. Each  evaluates and selects a design strategy, develops a project budget,  schedules milestones and tasks, and writes a proposal with support - societal impact, budget, duration, person hours, environmental impact,   ChE 120. Optimal Design of Chemical Systems. 9 units (1-6-2); third  term. Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 101, ChE 103 abc, ChE 126, or  instructor™s permission.  Short-term, open-ended projects that require  students to design and build a chemical process or manufacture a  chemical product. Each team selects a project after reviewing a col -lection of proposals. Students use chemical engineering principles    imposed by budget, schedule, logistics, environmental impact, safety,   ChE 126. Chemical Engineering Laboratory.  Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 101, ChE 103 abc, ChE 105, or instruc -tor™s permission.  Short-term projects that require students to work in  teams to design systems or system components. Projects typically  include unit operations and instruments for chemical detection. Each  -  constraints related to environmental impact, safety, and ethics. Students  also learn professional ethics through the analysis of case studies.   ChE 128. Chemical Engineering Design Laboratory.  9 units (1-6-2); second term. Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 101, ChE 103 abc,  or instructor™s permission.  Short-term, open-ended research projects targeting chemical processes and materials. Each student is required 519to design, construct, and troubleshoot her/his own process, then use chemical engineering principles to experimentally evaluate and optimize process metrics or material attributes. Where possible, cost analysis is performed. Instructors: Giapis, Vicic. ChE 130. Biomolecular Engineering Laboratory.  9 units (1-5-3); third  term. Prerequisites: ChE 63 ab, ChE 101 (may be taken concurrently)  or instructor™s permission.   research projects in biomolecular engineering and synthetic biology.  Emphasis will be on projects that apply rational or library-based design   Ch/ChE 140 ab. Principles and Applications of Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemistry.  ChE 141. Data Science for Chemical Systems. 9 units (1-2-6); third  term. Prerequisites: ChE 15, ACM/IDS 104.  Through short lectures,  in-class activities, and problem sets, students learn and use methods  in data science to complete projects focused on (i) descriptive and  predictive analyses of chemical processes and (ii) Quantitative Structure   SPC & SQC; time-series analysis; data preprocessing; dimensionality  reduction; supervised, reinforcement, and unsupervised learning; deci -sion tree & clustering methods; univariate and multivariate regression;   - ChE 142. Challenges in Data Science for Chemical Systems. 9 units (1-0-8); third term.  Prerequisites: ChE 141.  Student groups complete a  one-term, data-science project that addresses an instructor-approved  chemical engineering challenge. The project may be an original research  idea; related to work by a research group at the Institute; an entry in a   -ship; or other meaningful opportunity. There is no lecture, but students  participate in weekly progress updates. A student may not select a    Ch/ChE 147. Polymer Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Chemistry.  ChE/Ch 148. Polymer Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  An introduc -tion to the physics that govern the structure and dynamics of polymeric  -ious physical properties. Topics include conformation of a single poly - solutions; thermodynamics of polymer blends and block copolymers; Chemical Engineering520polyelectrolytes; rubber elasticity; polymer gels; linear viscoelasticity of   ChE 151 ab. Physical and Chemical Rate Processes.  12 units (3-0-9); second, third terms.  The foundations of heat, mass, and momentum  high Reynolds numbers; forced and free convective heat and mass   understanding, scaling, and formulation and solution of boundary-value problems. Applied mathematical techniques will be developed and used   ChE 152. Heterogeneous Kinetics and Reaction Engineering.  9  -sion.  Langmuir-Hinshelwood versus Eley-Rideal reaction mechanisms. Reac -  ChE/Ch 155. Chemistry of Catalysis. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Dis-cussion of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic reactions, with  emphasis on the relationships between the two areas and their role in   -  2021-2022.ESE/ChE 158. Aerosol Physics and Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term; Open to graduate students and seniors with instructor™s permis -sion. For description, see Environmental Science and Engineering. ChE/BE 163. Introduction to Biomolecular Engineering.  12 units  - The course introduces rational design and evolutionary methods for engineering functional protein and nucleic acid systems. Rational design topics include molecular modeling, positive and negative design paradigms, simulation and optimization of equilib-rium and kinetic properties, design of catalysts, sensors, motors, and circuits. Evolutionary design topics include evolutionary mechanisms and  assignments require programming (Python is the language of instruc-tion). Instructors: Bois, Pierce.ChE/Ch 164. Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 21 abc or instructor™s permis -sion. An introduction to the fundamentals and simple applications of statistical thermodynamics. Foundation of statistical mechanics; partition functions for various ensembles and their connection to thermodynam-capacity of solids; adsorption; phase transitions and order parameters; 521methods. Instructors: Wang, Chan. ChE/Ch 165. Chemical Thermodynamics. Prerequisite: ChE 63 ab or instructor™s permission.  An advanced course  its applications. Review of the laws of thermodynamics; thermodynamic potentials and Legendre transform; equilibrium and stability conditions;  metastability and phase separation kinetics; thermodynamics of single- chemical equilibria; surface and interface thermodynamics; electrolytes   ChE 174. Special Topics in Transport Phenomena.   term. Prerequisites: ACM 95/100 and ChE 151 ab or instructor™s permis -sion. May be repeated for credit.  Advanced problems in heat, mass, and   - and active matter. Other topics may be discussed depending on class   ESE/ME/EST/Ec/ChE 179. Climate Change Impacts, Mitigation and Adaptation. 3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.ChE/BE/MedE 188. Molecular Imaging. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch/Bi 110, ChE 101 and ACM 95 or equivalent.  This course will cover the basic principles of biological and medical imaging technologies including magnetic resonance, ultrasound, nuclear imag - of chemical and biological probes to obtain molecular information about  living systems using these modalities. Topics will include nuclear spin  behavior, sound wave propagation, radioactive decay, photon absorp -tion and scattering, spatial encoding, image reconstruction, statistical  analysis, and molecular contrast mechanisms. The design of molecular imaging agents for biomarker detection, cell tracking, and dynamic proposals for new molecular imaging agents for applications such as   2021-2022.ChE 190. Special Problems in Chemical Engineering.  Up to 9 units by arrangement; any term. Prerequisites: Instructor™s permission and ad -viser™s approval must be obtained before registering.  Special courses of readings or laboratory instruction. The student should consult a member    designed in consultation with the instructor. This course may be cred -Chemical Engineering522 Bi/BE/Ch/ChE/Ge 269. Integrative Projects in Microbial Science and  Engineering. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biology. ChE 280. Chemical Engineering Research.   candi-dates in chemical engineering. Main lines of research now in progress  are covered in detail in section two.  CHEMISTRY Ch 1 ab. General Chemistry.  0-5) second term. Lectures and recitations dealing with the principles of   periodic properties, ionic substances, covalent bonding, Lewis repre -sentations of molecules and ions, shapes of molecules, Lewis acids and   -namics, kinetics, chemical equilibria, electrochemistry, and introduction   Robb (b).Ch 3 a. Fundamental Techniques of Experimental Chemistry.  6 units  Introduces the basic principles and techniques of synthesis and analysis and develops the laboratory skills and precision that are fundamental to experimental chemistry. Freshmen  who have gained advanced placement into Ch 41 or Ch 21, or who are enrolled in Ch 10, are encouraged to take Ch 3 a in the fall term, limited enrollment. Students entering in the academic year 2020 and before pass/fail. Freshmen entering in the academic year 2021 and thereafter  Freshman Chemistry Laboratory.  Instructor: Mendez.Ch 3 x. Experimental Methods in Solar Energy Conversion.  6 units  Introduces concepts and laboratory methods in chemistry and materials science centered on the theme of solar energy conversion and storage. Students will perform experiments involving optical spectroscopy, electrochemistry, laser spectroscopy,  photochemistry, and photoelectrochemistry, culminating in the construc -tion and testing of dye-sensitized solar cells. Students entering in the of residence in order to be graded pass/fail. Freshmen entering in the of residence in order to be graded pass/fail. Ch 3 a and Ch 3 x both  -tory.  Instructor: Mendez.523Ch 4 ab. Synthesis and Analysis of Organic and Inorganic Com -pounds. 9 units (1-6-2). Prerequisites: Ch 1 (or the equivalent) and Ch  3 a or Ch 3 x. Ch 4 a is a prerequisite for Ch 4 b. Previous or concurrent  enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly recommended.  Introduction to methods  -    Ch 5 ab. Advanced Techniques of Synthesis and Analysis.  Ch 5 a 12  -uisites: Ch 4 ab. Ch 102 strongly recommended for Ch 5 b.  Modern    - (Ch 5 b) will be included. Methodology will include advanced techniques   Ch 6 ab. Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Laboratory.  9 units (1-5-3); second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ch 1, Ch 4 a, and Ch 21 or  equivalents (may be taken concurrently).  Introduction to modern physi -cal methods in chemistry and biology. Techniques include laser spec -troscopy, microwave spectroscopy, electron spin resonance, nuclear   probe microscopies, and UHV surface methods. The two terms can be   -champ.Ch 7. Advanced Experimental Methods in Bioorganic Chemistry.  9     Preference will be given to students who have taken Ch 5 a or Bi 10. This advanced  laboratory course will provide experience in powerful contemporary methods used in chemical biology, including polypeptide synthesis and  the selective labeling and imaging of glycoproteins in cells. Experiments will address amino acid protecting group strategies, biopolymer assem-bly and isolation, and product characterization. A strong emphasis will be  placed on understanding the chemical basis underlying the successful utilization of these procedures. In addition, experiments to demonstrate the application of commercially available enzymes for useful synthetic organic transformations will be illustrated. Students need only attend two lab sections per week. Instructor: Hsieh-Wilson.Ch 8.  Experimental Procedures of Synthetic Chemistry for Pre -medical Students.  Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x. Previous or concurrent enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly  recommended.  Open to non-pre-medical students, as space allows.  In- -Chemistry524 Ch/ChE 9.  Chemical Synthesis and Characterization for Chemical Engineering. 9 units (1-6-2); third term.  Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab and Ch  3 a or Ch 3 x. Previous or concurrent enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly  recommended.    and inorganic materials. Enrollment priority given to chemical engineer -Ch 10 abc. Frontiers in Chemistry.  units (1-4-1) third term. Prerequisites: Open for credit to freshmen and  sophomores. Ch 10 c prerequisites are Ch 10 ab, Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x, and  either Ch 1 ab, Ch 41 ab, or Ch 21 ab, and instructor™s permission.  Ch 10 ab is a weekly seminar by a member of the chemistry department on a topic of current research; the topic will be presented at an informal,  introductory level. Ch 10 c is a research-oriented laboratory course,  which will be supervised by a chemistry faculty member. Weekly class  meetings will provide a forum for participants to discuss their research   Ch 14. Chemical Equilibrium and Analysis. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Develops the basic principles of chemical equilibrium in aqueous solutions, emphasizing acid-base chemistry, complex ion formation, che -lation, solubility, oxidation-reduction reactions, and partitioning equilibria  for separations. Instructor: Rees.Ch 15. Chemical Equilibrium and Analysis Laboratory.  10 units (0-6-4); third term. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab, Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x, Ch 14, or  instructor™s permission.   modern instrumental techniques that are currently employed in indus -trial and academic research. Emphasis is on determinations of chemical  composition, measurement of equilibrium constants, evaluation of rates   Ch 21 abc. Physical Chemistry.   terms. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab, Ph 2 a or Ph 12 a, Ma 2; Ma 3 is recom -mended. Atomic and molecular quantum mechanics, spectroscopy,  chemical dynamics, statistical mechanics, and thermodynamics. In- Ch 25. Introduction to Biophysical Chemistry: Thermodynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab, Ph 2 a or Ph 12 a, Ma 2;  Ch 21 a recommended.  Develops the basic principles of solution ther-modynamics, transport processes, and reaction kinetics, with emphasis  2021-2022.525Ch 41 abc. Organic Chemistry.   terms. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab or instructor™s permission.  The synthesis, structure, and reaction mechanisms of organic compounds. Instructors: Grubbs (a), Hsieh-Wilson (b), Reisman (c).Ch 80. Chemical Research.   Units in accordance with work accomplished. Prerequisite: consent of  research supervisor.  report containing an appropriate description of the research work.  Ch 81. Independent Reading in Chemistry.  Units by arrangement. Pre -requisite: instructor™s permission.  Occasional advanced work involving reading assignments and a report on special topics. No more than 12  units in Ch 81 may be used as electives in the chemistry option. Ch 82. Senior Thesis Research.    -requisites: Instructor™s permission.  Three terms of Ch 82 are to be com -  - the Chemistry Curriculum and Undergraduate Studies Committee. The  thesis must be approved by both the research mentor and the CUSC.  An oral thesis defense will be arranged by the CUSC in the third term for   - Ch 90. Oral Presentation.  3 units (2-0-1); second term. Training in the  techniques of oral presentation of chemical and biochemical topics.   before groups. Strong oral presentation is an essential skill for success -      Ch 101. Chemistry Tutorials.  3 units (1-0-2); third term.  Small group  study and discussion on special areas of chemistry, chemical en -gineering, molecular biology, or biophysics. Instructors drawn from  tutorial sessions and assign short homework assignments, readings, or  discussions. Tutorials to be arranged with instructors before registration.  Ch 102. Introduction to Inorganic Chemistry.  9 units (4-0-5); third  term. Prerequisites: Ch 41 ab.  Structure and bonding of inorganic  species with special emphasis on spectroscopy, ligand substitution    Chemistry526Ch 104. Intermediate Organic Chemistry.  9 units (4-0-5); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 41 abc.  A survey of selected topics beyond introduc -tory organic chemistry, including reaction mechanisms and catalysis.  ChE/Ch/Bi/SEC 107. Social Media for Scientists. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.Ch/Bi 110. Introduction to Biochemistry.  term.   Lectures and recitation introducing the molecular basis of life processes. Topics will  include the structure and chemical properties of biological macromol-ecules, molecular biology methods, biological catalysis, and an overview of metabolism. Instructor: Clemons.Ch/Bi 111. Biochemistry of Gene Expression.  12 units (4-0-8); second term. Prerequisites: Ch/Bi 110; Bi 8 and Bi 122 recommended.  Lectures  and recitation on the molecular basis of biological structure and func -  -tion, repair and mutagenesis, transcription, RNA processing, and protein   Ch 112. Intermediate Inorganic Chemistry.  term. Prerequisites: Ch 102 or instructor™s permission.  Introduction to   - reactivity, and spectroscopy of commonly encountered classes of  Ch 117. Introduction to Electrochemistry.  Discussion of the fundamentals and applications of electrochemistry  with an emphasis on the structure of electrode-electrolyte interfaces,   techniques used to study electrode reactions, and application of elec -trochemical techniques to study materials chemistry. Topics may vary   electrode reactions, the electrical double layer, and kinetics of electrode   Ch 120 ab. Nature of the Chemical Bond.  Ch 120 a: 9 units (3-0-6), second term; Ch 120 b: (1-1-7), third term.  Prerequisites: general expo -sure to quantum mechanics (e.g., Ch 21 a).  Modern ideas of chemical bonding, with an emphasis on qualitative concepts useful for predictions of structures, energetics, excited states, and properties. Part a: The  quantum mechanical basis for understanding bonding, structures, ener-getics, and properties of materials (polymers, ceramics, metals alloys, semiconductors, and surfaces), including transition metal and organo-metallic systems with a focus on chemical reactivity. The emphasis is  on explaining chemical, mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties of materials in terms of atomistic concepts. Part b: The student does an  527individual research project using modern quantum chemistry computer programs to calculate wavefunctions, structures, and properties of real molecules. Instructor: Goddard.Ch 121 ab. Atomic-Level Simulations of Materials and Mol-ecules.  term. Prerequisites: Ch 21 a or Ch 125 a.  Application of Atomistic-based  methods [Quantum Mechanics (QM) and Molecular Dynamics (MD)] for predicting the structures and properties of molecules and solids and simulating the dynamical properties. This course emphasizes hands- on use of modern commercial software (such as Jaguar for QM, VASP  for periodic QM, and LAMMPS for MD) for practical applications and is aimed at experimentalists and theorists interested in understanding structures, properties, and dynamics in such areas as biological systems (proteins, DNA, carbohydrates, lipids); polymers (crystals, amorphous systems, co-polymers); semiconductors (group IV, III-V, surfaces,  defects); inorganic systems (ceramics, zeolites, superconductors, and metals); organo-metallics, and catalysis (heterogeneous, homogeneous, and electrocatalysis). Ch121a covers the basic methods with hands-on applications to systems of interest using modern software. The home -the second 5 weeks of the homework each student proposes a short research project and uses atomistic simulations to solve it. Ch121b each student selects a more extensive research project and uses atomistic simulations to solve it. Instructor: Goddard.Ch 122. Structure Determination by X-ray Crystallography.  9 units   - the direct and reciprocal lattice, Patterson and direct methods for phase   - Ch 125 ab. The Elements of Quantum Chemistry.  and second terms. Prerequisites: Ch 21 abc or an equivalent brief intro -duction to quantum mechanics. A treatment of quantum mechanics with  application to molecular and material systems. The basic elements of quantum mechanics, the electronic structure of atoms and molecules,   techniques relevant to spectroscopy will be covered. The course se - Weitekamp (b). Ge/Ch 127. Nuclear Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Ge/Ch 128. Cosmochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Chemistry528Ch/BMB 129. Introduction to Biophotonics.  term. Prerequisites: Ch 21 abc and Ch 125 recommended.  This course will cover basic optics and introduce modern optical spectroscopy  principles and microscopy techniques. Topics include molecular   spectroscopy, coherent microscopy, single-molecule spectroscopy, and    Ch 135. Chemical Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites:  Ch 21 abc and Ch 41 abc, or equivalent, or instructor™s permission.  In-troduction to the kinetics and dynamics of chemical reactions. Top -ics include scattering cross sections, rate constants, intermolecular  potentials, classical two-body elastic scattering, reactive scattering,  nonadiabatic processes, statistical theories of unimolecular reactions,  photochemistry, laser and molecular beam methods, theory of electron    Ch/ChE 140 ab. Principles and Applications of Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: APh/ EE 9 ab or instructor™s permission.  The properties and photoelectro -cells will be discussed. Topics include optical and electronic properties  of semiconductors; electronic properties of semiconductor junctions  with metals, liquids, and other semiconductors, in the dark and under il- junctions and practical applications of these systems will be highlighted.   9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ch 41 abc.  This course will address both  one-dimensional and two-dimensional techniques in NMR spectroscopy  which are essential to elucidating structures of organic and organome -tallic samples. Dynamic NMR phenomena, multinuclear, paramagnetic   NMR methods will also contribute to a clear understanding of two-di-  Ch 144 ab.  Advanced Organic Chemistry.  Prerequisites: Ch 41 abc; Ch 21 abc recommended.  An advanced survey of selected topics in modern organic chemistry. Topics vary from  year to year and may include structural and theoretical organic chemis -try; materials chemistry; macromolecular chemistry; mechanochemistry;   reactive intermediates; pericyclic reactions; and photochemistry. Not   Ch 145. Chemical Biology of Proteins.   -requisites: Ch 41 abc; Ch/Bi 110  recommended.  An advanced survey 529of current and classic topics in chemical biology. Content draws largely  from current literature and varies from year-to-year. Topics may include   catalysis and inhibition; cellular metabolism; chemical genetics; pro - Ch 146. Bioorganic Chemistry of Nucleic Acids.  9 units (3-0-6). Pre -requisite: Ch 41 ab.   nucleic acids, including DNA and RNA structures, molecular recogni -Topics include synthetic methods for the construction of DNA and RNA;   proteins, and oligonucleotide-directed triple helical formation; RNA   Ch/ChE 147. Polymer Chemistry.   - An introduction to the chemistry of polymers, including synthetic methods and mechanisms of macromolecule formation, char-acterization techniques, reactivity, and applications.  Instructor: Robb.ChE/Ch 148. Polymer Physics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering. Ch 149. Tutorial in Organic Chemistry.  Prerequisites: Ch 41 abc and instructor™s permission.  Discussion of key principles in organic chemistry, with an emphasis on reaction mecha - year graduate students with a strong foundation in organic chemistry.   -Ch 153 abc. Advanced Inorganic Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6) ; second  Ch 153 b in subsequent years) terms. Prerequisites: Ch 112 and Ch 21  abc or concurrent registration.  Ch 153 a: Topics in modern inorganic  chemistry. Electronic structure, spectroscopy, and photochemistry with  emphasis on examples from the research literature. Ch 153 b: Ap -plications of physical methods to the characterization of inorganic and bioinorganic species, with an emphasis on the practical application of Moessbauer, EPR, and pulse EPR spectroscopies. Ch 153 c: Theo -retical and spectroscopic approaches to understanding the electronic structure of transition metal ions. Topics in the 153bc alternate sequence  in electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, Moessbauer and  magnetic Moessbauer spectroscopy, vibronic interactions in electronic  absorption and resonance Raman spectroscopy, and bonding analyses  using x-ray absorption and/or emission spectroscopies. Instructor: Gray,  Winkler (a), Hadt (c).Chemistry530Ch 154 ab. Organometallic Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Prerequisite: Ch 112 or equivalent.  A general discussion of the reaction mechanisms and the synthetic and catalytic uses of transition   -tary reactions and methods for investigating reaction mechanisms. Third     ChE/Ch 155. Chemistry of Catalysis. 9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Chemical Engineering. ChE/Ch 164. Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering. ChE/Ch 165. Chemical Thermodynamics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.BMB/Bi/Ch 170. Biochemistry and Biophysics of Macromolecules  and Molecular Assemblies. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics. ESE/Ge/Ch 171. Atmospheric Chemistry I. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.  ESE/Ge/Ch 172. Atmospheric Chemistry II. 3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.  BMB/Bi/Ch 173. Biophysical/Structural Methods. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.BMB/Bi/Ch 174. Advanced Topics in Biochemistry and Biophys -ics. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.ESE/Ch 176. Environmental Physical Organic Chemistry Part I.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Environmental Science and  Engineering.ESE/Ch 177. Environmental Physical Organic Chemistry Part II.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Environmental Science and  Engineering.BMB/Ch 178. Macromolecular Function: kinetics, energetics, and  mechanisms. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.Ch 180. Chemical Research.  Units by arrangement.   531BMB/Ch 202 abc. Biochemistry Seminar Course. third terms.  For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.Ch 212. Bioinorganic Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequi -sites: Ch 112 and Ch/Bi 110 or equivalent. Current topics in bioinorganic  chemistry will be discussed, including metal storage and regulation,   -talloprotein design, and metal-nucleic acid interactions and reactions.   Ch 213 abc. Advanced Ligand Field Theory.  second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ch 21 abc or concurrent registration.  A tutorial course of problem solving in the more advanced aspects of li -  Ch 225. Advanced Quantum Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch125ab or equivalent, or permission of instruc -tors. The electronic structure of atoms and molecules, the interactions    Ch 226. Optical and Nonlinear Spectroscopy.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ch125ab, or equivalent instruction in quantum  mechanics. Quantum mechanical foundations of optical spectroscopy  as applied to chemical and material systems. Topics include optical  properties of materials, nonlinear and quantum optics, and multidimen - BMB/Ch 230. Macromolecular Structure Determination with  Modern X-ray Crystallography Methods.  12 units (2-4-6). For course description, see Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.Ch 242 ab. Chemical Synthesis. Prerequisite: Ch 41 abc.  An integrated approach to synthetic problem   with concurrent development of strategies for synthesis design. Part a  will focus on the application of modern methods of stereocontrol in the   focus on strategies and reactions for the synthesis of cyclic systems.  Ch 247. Organic Reaction Mechanisms.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 41 abc, Ch 242 a recommended.  This course will dis-  cycloaddition chemistry, rearrangements, radical reactions, metal-cata - -ed only for students interested in advanced study in organic chemistry   Chemistry532Ch 250. Advanced Topics in Chemistry.  3 units; third term.  Content will vary from year to year; topics are chosen according to the inter - course. In Spring 2020 the class will be a seminar course in pharma-ceutical chemistry with lectures by industrial researchers from both  discovery (medicinal chemistry) and development (process chemistry)   Ch 251. Advanced Topics in Chemical Biology.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term. Prerequisites: Prerequisites: Ch 145 or 146 or consent of the  instructor.  Advanced Topics in Chemical Biology. Hours and units to be  arranged. Content will vary from year to year; topics are chosen accord - Ch 252. Advanced Topics in Chemical Physics.  Hours and units to be arranged. Content will vary from year to year; topics are chosen accord - Ch/Bi 253. Advanced Topics in Biochemistry.  6 units (2-0-4); third  term. Hours and units to be arranged. Content will vary from year to    Bi/BE/Ch/ChE/Ge 269. Integrative Projects in Microbial Science and  Engineering. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biology. Ch 279. Rotations in Chemistry.  Variable units as arranged with the   By arrangement with  the opportunity to engage in a short-term research project culminating  in a presentation to their peers enrolled in the course and participating  laboratories. (Pass-Fail only). Ch 280. Chemical Research.  Hours and units by arrangement. By  students are directed in research in chemistry. CIVIL ENGINEERING CE 90 abc. Structural Analysics and Design. second, third terms. Prerequisite: ME 35 abc.    indeterminate structures. Design of selected structures in timber, steel,  and reinforced concrete providing an introduction to working stress,  load and resistance factor, and ultimate strength approaches. In each of  the second and third terms a design project will be undertaken involv -533 CE 100. Special Topics in Civil Engineering.  Units to be based upon work done, any term. Special problems or courses arranged to meet   Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc. Fluid Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc. Mechanics of Structures and Solids.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  CE/Ae/AM 108 ab. Computational Mechanics. second terms. Prerequisites: Ae/AM/ME/CE 102 abc or Ae/GE/ME 160  ab, or instructor™s permission.  Numerical methods and techniques for solving initial boundary value problems in continuum mechanics (from  heat conduction to statics and dynamics of solids and structures). Finite     -chanics. Transient and nonlinear problems. Computational aspects and   CE/ME 112 ab. Hydraulic Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Prerequisites: ME 11 abc, ME 12 abc; ACM 95/100 or equivalent  (may be taken concurrently).   jump, hydraulic structures (weirs, inlet and outlet works, dams), hydrau -  ME/CE/Ge/ESE 146. Computational Methods for Flow in Porous Media. 9 units (3-0-6); second. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.AM/CE/ME 150 abc. Graduate Engineering Seminar.  1 unit; each term. For course description, see Applied Mechanics.AM/CE 151. Dynamics and Vibration.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Applied Mechanics.CE 160 ab. Structural and Earthquake Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  response of structural systems, Newmark time integration, Newton- Raphson iteration methodology for the response of nonlinear systems,  stability of iteration schemes, static and dynamic numerical analysis of  mass, and damping matrices, material and geometric nonlinearity ef-Civil Engineering534fects, formulation of a nonlinear 2-D beam element, uniform and nonuni- frames, and large deformation analysis), seismic design and analysis of  steel moment frame and braced frame systems, steel member behavior (topics include bending, buckling, torsion, warping, and lateral torsional  member behavior (topics include bending, shear, torsion, and PMM  interaction), and seismic design requirements for reinforced concrete    Media. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engi-neering.Ae/CE 165 ab. Mechanics of Composite Materials and Structures.  9 units (2-2-5). For course description, see Aerospace. CE/ME/Ge 173. Mechanics of Soils. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Pre -requisites: Continuum MechanicsŠAe/Ge/ME 160a.  Basic principles of  sands, clays and silts. Elements of soil behavior such as stress-strain-  and strain rate; strength and compression of granular soils; consolida -tion theory and settlement analysis; and critical state soil mechanics.  ME/CE/Ge 174. Mechanics of Rocks. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering. CE 180. Experimental Methods in Earthquake Engineering. 9 units   Labora-tory work involving calibration and performance of basic transducers suitable for the measurement of strong earthquake ground motion, and  of structural response to such motion. Study of principal methods of dy -namic tests of structures, including generation of forces and measure - CE 181 ab. Engineering Seismology.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Characteristics of potentially destructive earthquakes from the  engineering point of view. Theory of seismometers, seismic waves in a  continuum, plane waves in layered media, surface waves, basin waves,   -  CE 200. Advanced Work in Civil Engineering.  6 or more units as  arranged; any term. A faculty mentor will oversee a student proposed,  independent research or study project to meet the needs of graduate  -ten report is required for each term.  535CE 201. Advanced Topics in Civil Engineering.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond, third terms.  The faculty will prepare courses on advanced topics to  Ae/AM/CE/ME 214. Computational Solid Mechanics. . For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/CE 221. Space Structures.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  CE/Ge/ME 222. Earthquake Source Processes, Debris Flows, and  Soil Liquefaction: Physics-based Modeling of Failure in Granular  Media. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  A seminar-style course focusing on   consist of student-led presentations of active research at Caltech and   AM/CE/ME 252. Linear and Nonlinear Waves in Structured Media.  9 units (2-1-6). For course description, see Applied Mechanics.Ae/AM/CE/ME/Ge 265 ab. Static and Dynamic Failure of Brittle  Solids and Interfaces, from the Micro to the Mega.  9 units; (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. CE 300. Research in Civil Engineering.  Hours and units by arrange-ment.   in research. COMPUTATION AND NEURAL SYSTEMS  CNS 100. Introduction to Computation and Neural Systems.  1 unit; This course is designed to introduce undergraduate and   undertaken by CNS faculty. Topics from all the CNS research labs are  discussed and span the range from biology to engineering. Graded  CNS/Psy/Bi 102 ab. Brains, Minds, and Society.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond, third terms.  Prerequisites: NB/Bi/CNS 150 and CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/ NB 187, or instructor™s permission.  Introduction to the computations  made by the brain during economic and social decision making and  and conscious processing. Emotion. Behavioral economics. Goal- directed and habit learning. Facial processing in social neuroscience.   - Computation and Neural Systems536 Psy/CNS 105 ab. Frontiers in Neuroeconomics.  5 units (1.5-0-3.5). For course description, see Psychology. Psy/CNS 130. Introduction to Human Memory.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Psychology.  CNS/Psy/Bi 131. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will serve as an introduction to basic   covering areas such as principles of classical conditioning, blocking  and conditioned inhibition, models of classical conditioning, instrumen-tal conditioning, reinforcement schedules, punishment and avoidance  learning. The course will track the development of ideas from the begin -nings of behavioral psychology in the early 20th century to contempo- Psy/CNS 132. Computational Reinforcement-learning in Biological  and Non-biological Systems. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Psychology.  Ge/Bi/BE/CNS/ESE 147. Challenges and Opportunities in Quantita-tive Ecology.  3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.EE/CNS/CS 148. Selected Topics in Computational Vision.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering. NB/Bi/CNS 150. Introduction to Neuroscience.  10 units (4-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology.  NB/Bi/CNS 152. Neural Circuits and Physiology of Appetite and  Body Homeostasis. . For course description, see Neuro -biology. NB/Bi/CNS 154. Principles of Neuroscience. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences. CS/CNS/EE 156 ab. Learning Systems.  9 units (3-1-5). For course description, see Computer Science. NB/Bi/CNS 157. Comparative Nervous Systems. . For course description, see Neurobiology. 537Bi/CNS 158. Vertebrate Evolution.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Biology.  CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159. Advanced Topics in Machine Learning.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computer Science. Pl/CNS/NB/Bi/Psy 161. Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Philosophy. NB/Bi/CNS 162. Cellular and Systems Neuroscience Laboratory.  . For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 163. The Biological Basis of Neural Disorders. 6 units (3-0-3); second term. For course description, see Neurobiology.NB/Bi/CNS 164. Tools of Neurobiology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. CS/CNS/EE/IDS 165. Foundations of Machine Learning and Statisti -cal Inference.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computer Science.CS/CNS 171. Introduction to Computer Graphics Laboratory.  12 units (3-6-3). For course description, see Computer Science. CS/CNS 174. Computer Graphics Projects. . For course description, see Computer Science. CNS/Bi/Psy/NB 176. Cognition. 9 units (4-0-5); third term.  The cornerstone of current progress in understanding the mind, the brain,  and the relationship between the two is the study of human and animal  cognition. This course will provide an in-depth survey and analysis of  behavioral observations, theoretical accounts, computational models,  patient data, electrophysiological studies, and brain-imaging results on  mental capacities such as attention, memory, emotion, object represen - CNS 180. Research in Computation and Neural Systems.  Units by arrangement with faculty.   Bi/CNS/NB 184. The Primate Visual System.  9 units (3-1-5). For course description, see Biology. Bi/CNS/NB 185. Large Scale Brain Networks.  6 units (2-0-4); third  term. For course description, see Biology. CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. Vision: From Computational Theory to Neu -ronal Mechanisms.  12 units (4-4-4); second term. Lecture, laboratory,  and project course aimed at understanding visual information process -ing, in both machines and the mammalian visual system. The course will Computation and Neural Systems538  hardware (i.e., neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of the mammalian  visual system). The course will focus on early vision processes, in par - analysis, visual attention and boundary detection. Students will be  as complete one project integrating aspects of mathematical analysis,    CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187. Neural Computation. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. -ming. This course aims at a quantitative understanding of how the nervous system computes. The goal is to link phenomena across scales  from membrane proteins to cells, circuits, brain systems, and behavior.  We will learn how to formulate these connections in terms of math -ematical models, how to test these models experimentally, and how to  interpret experimental data quantitatively. The concepts will be devel -oped with motivation from some of the fascinating phenomena of animal  sounds, sensing of single photons, reliable navigation and homing, rapid decision-making during escape, one-shot learning, and large-capacity recognition memory.  Instructors: Meister, Rutishauser. BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 ab. Biomolecular Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Bioengineering.Bi/CNS/NB 195. Mathematics in Biology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biology. BE/Bi/CNS/NB 197. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year; taken in any term. For course description, see Bioengineering. NB/Bi/CNS 216. Behavior of Mammals. For course description, see Neurobiology.  NB/Bi/CNS 217. Central Mechanisms in Perception. . For course description, see Neurobiology. NB/Bi/CNS 220. Genetic Dissection of Neural Circuit Function. 6 . For course description, see Neurobiology. Bi/CNS/BE/NB 230. Optogenetic and CLARITY Methods in Experi-mental Neuroscience.  9 units (3-2-4); third term.  For course descrip-tion, see Biology. 539Bi/BE/CNS/NB 241. Spatial Genomics. For course description, see Biology.  CNS/Bi/NB 247. Cerebral Cortex.  6 units (2-0-4); second term. Prerequisite: NB/Bi/CNS 150 or equivalent.  A general survey of the     human cortical function and includes correlations between animal stud -ies and human neuropsychological and functional imaging literature.   NB/Bi/CNS 250 c. Topics in Systems Neuroscience.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Neurobiology. CNS 251. Human Brain Mapping: Theory and Practice. 9 units (2-1-6); second term. A course in functional brain imaging. An overview of contemporary brain imaging techniques, usefulness of brain imaging compared to other techniques available to the modern neuroscientist.  Review of what is known about the physical and biological bases of the signals being measured. Design and implementation of a brain imaging   Psy/Bi/CNS 255. Topics in Emotion and Social Cognition.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Psychology.  CNS/Bi/NB 256. Decision Making. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  This  decision making, and reward-based learning. The course covers the  anatomy and physiology of reward and action systems. Special empha - -terplay between reward, motivation, and attention; and the selection of  actions. Links between concepts in economics and the neural mecha- studies collected using behavioral, neurophysiological, and functional    CNS 280. Research in Computation and Neural Systems.  Hours and units by arrangement. For graduate students admitted to candidacy in computation and neural systems. SS/Psy/CNS 285. Topics in Social, Cognitive, and Decision Scienc -es. 3 units (1.5-0-1.5). For course description, see Social Science.CNS/Bi 286 abc. Special Topics in Computation and Neural Sys -tems. Units to be arranged. First, second, third terms. Students may  register with permission of the responsible faculty member.  Computation and Neural Systems540COMPUTER SCIENCE CS 1. Introduction to Computer Programming.  term.  design process and pragmatic programming skills. It will use the  Python programming language and will not assume previous program - assignment, control structures, functions, scoping, compound data,    and object-oriented programming. Program development and mainte -nance skills including debugging, testing, and documentation will also  graphics, numerics, networking, and games. At the end of the course, students will be ready to learn other programming languages in courses  such as CS 11, and will also be ready to take more in-depth courses   CS 1 x. Intermediate Computer Programming. term. Prerequisites: Enrollment by instructor permission only.  Students must be placed into this course via the CS placement test. An inter- design process and pragmatic programming skills. It will use the Java   -ence such as an AP CS A course. Material will focus on more advanced   programming. Program development and maintenance skills including  debugging, testing, and documentation will also be taught. Assignments  networking, and games. At the end of the course, students will be ready  to learn other programming languages in courses such as CS 11, and  will also be ready to take more in-depth courses such as CS 2 and CS   CS 2. Introduction to Programming Methods.  9 units (3-5-1); second term. Prerequisites: CS 1 or equivalent.  CS 2 is a demanding course in programming languages and computer science. Topics covered include  data structures, including lists, trees, and graphs; implementation and  performance analysis of fundamental algorithms; algorithm design principles, in particular recursion and dynamic programming; Heavy  emphasis is placed on the use of compiled languages and development tools, including source control and debugging. The course includes   and program design. The course is intended to establish a foundation  for further work in many topics in the computer science option. Instruc-CS 3. Introduction to Software Design.  9 units (1-6-2); third term.  Pre -requisites: CS 2 or equivalent.  -ing large programs in a low-level language. Heavy emphasis is placed  541on documentation, testing, and software architecture. Students will      engineering topics covered include code reviews, testing and testability,   Blank.CS 4. Fundamentals of Computer Programming.  9 units (3-4-2); second term. Prerequisite: CS 1 or instructor™s permission.  This course gives students the conceptual background necessary to construct and   -standing evaluation models, and using major programming language  constructs (functions and procedures, conditionals, recursion and   higher-order functions and functional programming, and object-oriented    of data representation, and abstraction management. This course is  intended for students with some programming background who want  a deeper understanding of the conceptual issues involved in computer  Ma/CS 6/106 abc. Introduction to Discrete Mathematics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mathematics. CS 9. Introduction to Computer Science Research.  1 unit (1-0-0); This course will introduce students to research areas in CS   undergraduates. More senior students may wish to take the course to  gain an understanding of the scope of research in computer science.   EE/CS 10 ab. Introduction to Digital Logic and Embedded Systems.  6 units (2-3-1). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CS 11. Computer Language Lab.  terms. Prerequisites: CS 1 or instructor™s permission.  A self-paced lab  -ring their programming skills to a particular programming language. The  course can be used for any language of the student™s choosing, subject   through the pragmatic use of the chosen language, building his or her   their own programming project as the target demonstration of their new  language skills. This course is available for undergraduate students only.  Graduate students should register for CS 111. CS 11 may be repeated   Vanier.   Computer Science542CS 12. Student-Taught Topics in Computing.  second, third terms.  Prerequisites: CS 1 or instructor™s permission.  Each section covers a topic in computing with associated sets or projects.  Sections are designed and taught by an undergraduate student under  the supervision of a CMS faculty member. CS 12 may be repeated for  credit of up to a total of nine units. CS 19 ab. Introduction to Computer Science in Industry.  2 units This course will introduce students to CS  in industry through weekly overview talks by alums and engineers in  industry. It is aimed at second-year undergraduates. Others may wish  to take the course to gain an understanding of the scope of computer science in industry. Additionally students will complete short weekly  assignments aimed at preparing them for interactions with industry. This   CS 21. Decidability and Tractability.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: CS 2 (may be taken concurrently).  This course introduces  the formal foundations of computer science, the fundamental limits of  automata and Turing machines, decidability and undecidability, reduc -tions between computational problems, and the theory of NP-complete -CS 22. Data Structures & Parallelism.  9 units (3-6-0); second term. Prerequisites: CS 2 or instructor™s permission.  CS 22 is a demand-ing course that covers implementation, correctness, and analysis of  data structures and some parallel algorithms. This course is intended  for students who have already taken a data structures course at the  level of CS 2. Topics include implementation and analysis of skip lists,  trees, hashing, and heaps as well as various algorithms (including string   written and programming assignments covering the lecture material.  CS 24. Introduction to Computing Systems.  term. Prerequisites: CS 2 and CS 3.  Basic introduction to computer  systems, including hardware-software interface, computer architecture,  -tions and the hardware and software techniques necessary to support   - CS 38. Algorithms. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: CS 2; Ma/ CS 6 a or Ma 121 a; and CS 21. This course introduces techniques for  (the greedy approach, divide and conquer, dynamic programming, linear  programming) will be introduced through a variety of algebraic, graph,  543  CS 42. Computer Science Education in K-14 Settings. 6 units (2-2-2); second, third terms.  This course will focus on computer science current state of computer science education within the United States,  develop curricula targeted at students from diverse backgrounds, and   psychology and neuropsychology, students will become familiar with  various pedagogical methods and theories of learning, while apply -ing these in practice as part of a teaching group partnered with a local   spend about 2 hours teaching, 2 hours developing curricula, and 2    CS/EE/ME 75 abc. Multidisciplinary Systems Engineering. 3 units units (2-6-1), or 12 units (2-9-1) second and third terms; units according  to project selected.  This course presents the fundamentals of modern  -sign project. Students from a variety of disciplines will conceive, design,  implement, and operate a system involving electrical, information, and  setting project goals and objectives, managing interfaces between com -ponent subsystems, working in design teams, and tracking progress   meetings and learn some basic tools for project design, while taking  courses in CS, EE, and ME that are related to the course project. During  the third term, the entire team will build, document, and demonstrate     2021-2022.CS 80 abc. Undergraduate Thesis.   Prerequisite: instructor™s permission, which should be obtained suf - Individual research  project, carried out under the supervision of a member of the computer  science faculty (or other faculty as approved by the computer science     CS 81 abc. Undergraduate Projects in Computer Science.  Units are  assigned in accordance with work accomplished. Prerequisites: Consent  of supervisor is required before registering.  Supervised research or  development in computer science by undergraduates. The topic must   Computer Science544presented on completion of research. This course can (with approval) be    CS 90. Undergraduate Reading in Computer Science.  Units are as -signed in accordance with work accomplished. Prerequisites: Consent  of supervisor is required before registering.  Supervised reading in  computer science by undergraduates. The topic must be approved by    CS 101. Special Topics in Computer Science.  Units in accordance    21 and CS 38, or instructor™s permission.  The topics covered vary from year to year, depending on the students and staff. Primarily for under -graduates.CS 102 abc. Seminar in Computer Science. 3, 6, or 9 units as ar-ranged with the instructor.  Instructor™s permission required. CS 103 abc. Reading in Computer Science. 3, 6, or 9 units as ar-ranged with the instructor.  Instructor™s permission required. HPS/Pl/CS 110. Causation and Explanation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.CS 111. Graduate Programming Practicum.  second terms. Prerequisites: CS 1 or equivalent.  A self-paced lab that  provides students with extra practice and supervision in transferring their programming skills to a particular programming language. The course   -proval by the instructor. A series of exercises guide the student through  the pragmatic use of the chosen language, building his or her familiarity,  experience, and style. More advanced students may propose their own programming project as the target demonstration of their new language skills. This course is available for graduate students only. CS 111 may be  repeated for credit of up to a total of nine units. Undergraduates should register for CS 11.  Instructors: Blank, Vanier. Ec/ACM/CS 112. Bayesian Statistics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Economics.CS 115. Functional Programming.  9 units (3-4-2); third term. Prereq -uisites: CS 1 and CS 4. This course is a both a theoretical and practical  introduction to functional programming, a paradigm which allows pro - -taneously avoiding large classes of bugs that plague more conventional  imperative and object-oriented languages. The course will introduce    types, polymorphic types, function composition, point-free style, prov -545 type classes, and modules. Some advanced topics such as monad  CS 116. Reasoning about Program Correctness.  term. Prerequisite: CS 1 or equivalent.  This course presents the use  of logic and formal reasoning to prove the correctness of sequential  and concurrent programs. Topics in logic include propositional logic,   programs. The course presents a programming notation and its formal  semantics, Hoare logic and its use in proving program correctness,    Ma/CS 117 abc. Computability Theory.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mathematics. CS 118.  Automata-Theoretic Software Analysis.  9 units (3-3-3); sec-ond term. An introduction to the use of automata theory in the formal analysis of both concurrent and sequentially executing software systems.  The course covers the use of logic model checking with linear temporal logic and interactive techniques for property-based static source code analysis. Instructor: Holzmann.EE/CS 119 abc. Advanced Digital Systems Design. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CS/Ph 120. Quantum Cryptography.   -uisites: Ma 1b, Ph 2b or Ph 12b, CS 21, CS 38 or equivalent recom -mended (or instructor™s permission).  This course is an introduction to  entanglement and uncertainty, to implement cryptographic tasks with  levels of security that are impossible to achieve classically. The course  covers the fundamental ideas of quantum information that form the basis for quantum cryptography, such as entanglement and quantify - quantum key distribution and see protocols and proofs of security for  this task. We will also discuss the basics of device-independent quan -tum cryptography as well as other cryptographic tasks and protocols,   2021-2022.CS/IDS 121. Relational Databases. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: CS 1 or equivalent.  Introduction to the basic theory and  usage of relational database systems. It covers the relational data  model, relational algebra, and the Structured Query Language (SQL).  The course introduces the basics of database schema design and cov -ers the entity-relationship model, functional dependency analysis, and  normal forms. Additional topics include other query languages based on the relational calculi, data-warehousing and dimensional analysis, writ -Computer Science546ing and using stored procedures, working with hierarchies and graphs  within relational databases, and an overview of transaction processing  CS 122. Database System Implementation. 9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisites: CS 2, CS 38, CS/IDS 121 and familiarity with Java,  or instructor™s permission.  and approaches behind modern relational database systems. Topics   recovery. Assignments consist of a series of programming projects   with the topics covered in class. The course also has a strong focus on  proper software engineering practices, including version control, testing,   CS 123. Projects in Database Systems.  9 units (0-0-9); third term. Pre -requisites: CS/IDS 121 and CS 122.   substantial project in databases, write up a report describing their work,   CS 124. Operating Systems. 12 units (3-6-3); third term. Prerequisites:  CS 24. modern operating systems, such as kernel architectures, the process  abstraction and process scheduling, system calls, concurrency within  work in groups to complete a series of challenging programming proj -ects, implementing major components of an instructional operating sys-   EE/CS/MedE 125. Digital Electronics and Design with FPGAs and  VHDL. 9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see Electrical Engineer-ing.EE/Ma/CS 126 ab. Information Theory.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 3.  For course description, see Electrical Engi-neering. EE/Ma/CS/IDS 127. Error-Correcting Codes. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering. ME/CS/EE 129. Experimental Robotics. 9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.CS 130. Software Engineering.  9 units (3-3-3); second and fourth terms. Prerequisites: CS 2 or equivalent.  This course presents a survey  of software engineering principles relevant to all aspects of the software  547 testing, and release management, including a review of the relevant re - these topics in depth. Programming assignments use Python and Git,  and students should be familiar with Python at a CS1 level, and Git at a  CS 131. Programming Languages.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Pre -requisites: CS 4.  CS 131 is a course on programming languages and  their implementation. It teaches students how to program in a number in use today (imperative, object-oriented, and functional). It will also teach students how to build and modify the implementations of these languages. Emphasis will not be on syntax or parsing but on the es-sential differences in these languages and their implementations. Both  dynamically-typed and statically-typed languages will be implemented. Relevant theory will be covered as needed. Implementations will mostly be interpreters, but some features of compilers will be covered if time permits. Enrollment limited to 30 students. Not offered 2021-2022.   In-structor: Vanier. CS 132. Web Development.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Covers full-stack web development with HTML5, CSS, client-side JS (ES6) and server-side JS (Node.js/Express) for web API development. Concepts including separation of concerns, the  client-server relationship, user experience, accessibility, and security will  also be emphasized throughout the course. Assignments will alternate  between formal and semi-structured student-driven projects, providing students various opportunities to apply material to their individual inter-ests. No prior web development background is required, though students and HTML5/ES6 standards. Instructor: Hovik.ME/CS/EE 133 abc. Robotics. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.ME/CS/EE 134. Robotic Systems. 9 units (3-6-0). For course descrip-tion, see Mechanical Engineering.EE/CS/EST 135. Power System Analysis.   For course description, see Electrical Engineering.EE/Ma/CS/IDS 136. Topics in Information Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CS 137. Algorithms in the Real World.  12 units (2-9-1); third term.  Pre -requisites: CS 24.  their usage in the real world. The course covers compression, advanced  data structures, numerical algorithms, cryptography, computer algebra,  and parallelism. The goal of the course is for students to see how to  Computer Science548 -CS 138. Computer Algorithms. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course   CMS/CS/IDS 139. Analysis and Design of Algorithms. 12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Computation and Mathematical Sciences.CS 141. Hack Society: Projects from the Public Sector.  9 units (0-0-9); third term. Prerequisites: CS/IDS 142, 143, CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144,  or permission from instructor.  There is a large gap between the public   opportunity for the development of innovative solutions to problems  faced by society. Students will develop technology-based projects    2021-2022. CS/IDS 142. Distributed Computing.  -uisites: CS 24, CS 38. Programming distributed systems. Mechanics for  cooperation among concurrent agents. Programming sensor networks  and cloud computing applications. Applications of machine learning     CS/EE/IDS 143. Communication Networks. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 3, CS 24 and CS 38, or instructor permission.  This course focuses on the link layer (two) through the transport layer  (four) of Internet protocols. It has two distinct components, analyti -cal and systems. In the analytical part, after a quick summary of basic mechanisms on the Internet, we will focus on congestion control and   -  -tion, Lyapunov stability theorems, passivity theorems, gradient descent,  contraction mapping, and Nyquist stability theory. We will apply these  results to prove equilibrium and stability properties of the congestion   part, the students will build a software simulator of Internet routing and   to basic analytical tools that are applicable beyond congestion control,  but also to demonstrate in depth the entire process of understanding a  -549 - CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144. Networks: Structure & Economics.  12 units (3-4-5). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sci-ences.CS/EE 145. Projects in Networking.  9 units (0-0-9); third term. Pre -requisites: Either CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144 or CS/IDS 142 in the preceding  term, or instructor permission.  -stantial project in networking, write up a report describing their work,   CS/EE 146. Control and Optimization of Networks.  9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 3 or instructor™s permis -sion. This is a research-oriented course meant for undergraduates and  beginning graduate students who want to learn about current research  topics in networks such as the Internet, power networks, social net -works, etc. The topics covered in the course will vary, but will be pulled    EE/CS 147. Digital Ventures Design.   -uisites: none. For course description, see Electrical Engineering. EE/CNS/CS 148. Selected Topics in Computational Vision.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering. CS/Ec 149. Algorithmic Economics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course will equip students to engage with active research at the inter-section of social and information sciences, including: algorithmic game theory and mechanism design; auctions; matching markets; and learning in games. Instructor: Sandomirskii.CS/IDS 150 ab. Probability and Algorithms.  third terms. Prerequisites: part a: CS 38 and Ma 5 abc; part b: part a or  another introductory course in discrete probability.   - topics such as weighted sampling, epsilon-biased sample spaces, ad- CS 151. Complexity Theory.  12 units (3-0-9); third term. Prerequisites:  CS 21 and CS 38, or instructor™s permission.  This course describes a  according to the computational resources (such as time, space, ran - -Computer Science550   CS 152. Introduction to Cryptography.  Prerequisites: Ma 1b, CS 21, CS 38 or equivalent recommended.  This  part of the course introduces fundamental constructions in private-key  cryptography, including one-way functions, pseudo-random generators  and authentication, and in public-key cryptography, including trapdoor  one-way functions, collision-resistant hash functions and digital sig -natures. The second part of the course covers selected topics such as   --tum money, quantum key distribution. The course is mostly theoretical  and requires mathematical maturity. There will be a small programming   CS/IDS 153. Current Topics in Theoretical Computer Science.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: CS 21 and CS 38, or instructor™s  permission. May be repeated for credit, with permission of the instruc -tor. Students in this course will study an area of current interest in theo -retical computer science. The lectures will cover relevant background  material at an advanced level and present results from selected recent   read and present a research paper. CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.CS/CNS/EE 156 ab. Learning Systems.   terms. Prerequisites: Ma 2 and CS 2, or equivalent.  Introduction to  the theory, algorithms, and applications of automated learning. How  much information is needed to learn a task, how much computation is  involved, and how it can be accomplished. Special emphasis will be   IDS/ACM/CS 157. Statistical Inference.  9 units (3-2-4). For course description, see Information and Data Sciences.IDS/ACM/CS 158. Fundamentals of Statistical Learning.  9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Information and Data Sciences.CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159. Advanced Topics in Machine Learning.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: CS 155; strong background in  statistics, probability theory, algorithms, and linear algebra; background  in optimization is a plus as well. This course focuses on current topics in  machine learning research. This is a paper reading course, and students  551  EE/CS/IDS 160. Fundamentals of Information Transmission and  Storage. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineer-ing.EE/CS 161. Big Data Networks. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CS/IDS 162. Data, Algorithms and Society.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: CS 38 and CS 155 or 156a.  - and communication networks through a social lens. We will draw upon  theory and practices from art, media, computer science and technology  society. The course includes projects, lectures, readings, and discus -sions. Students will learn mathematical formalisms, critical thinking and  creative problem solving to connect algorithms to their practical imple -  CS 163. Making Data Visual.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  For course CS/CNS/EE/IDS 165. Foundations of Machine Learning and Statisti -cal Inference.  12 units (3-3-6); second term. Prerequisites: CMS/ACM/ IDS 113, ACM/EE/IDS 116, CS 156a, ACM/CS/IDS 157 or instruc-tor™s permission.  The course assumes students are comfortable with  analysis, probability, statistics, and basic programming. This course  will cover core concepts in machine learning and statistical inference.  The ML concepts covered are spectral methods (matrices and tensors),   -  bounds, Rao-Blackwell theory, variational inference, and multiple test -ing. In addition to covering the core concepts, the course encourages   the age of deep learning? What are the outstanding open problems?    Anandkumar.  CS/EE/IDS 166. Computational Cameras. 12 units (3-3-6); third  term.   Computational cameras overcome the limitations of traditional cameras, by moving part of the image formation process from hardware to software. In this -tion of signal processing, applied optics, computer graphics, and vision. At the start of the course, we will study modern image processing and image editing pipelines, including those encountered on DSLR cameras Computer Science552and mobile phones. Then we will study the physical and computa - course has a strong hands-on component, in the form of homework will have the opportunity to implement many of the techniques covered in the class. Example homework assignments include building an end-to-end HDR (High Dynamic Range) imaging pipeline, implementing Pois-EE/CS/IDS 167. Introduction to Data Compression and Storage.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.ME/CS/EE 169. Mobile Robots. 9 units (2-7-0). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.CS/CNS 171. Computer Graphics Laboratory.   in linear algebra, starting with CS2 and Ma1b. This is a challenging course that introduces the basic ideas behind computer graphics and  some of its fundamental algorithms. Topics include graphics input  and output, the graphics pipeline, sampling and image manipulation, three-dimensional transformations and interactive modeling, basics of  physically based modeling and animation, simple shading models and their hardware implementation, and some of the fundamental algorithms    CS/CNS 174. Computer Graphics Projects. term.   This laboratory class offers students an opportu -nity for independent work including recent computer graphics research. In coordination with the instructor, students select a computer graphics  modeling, rendering, interaction, or related algorithm and implement it. Students are required to present their work in class and discuss the results of their implementation and possible improvements to the basic  Not  Instructor: Barr. EE/CS/MedE 175. Digital Circuits Analysis and Design with Com -plete VHDL and RTL Approach.  9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CS 176. Computer Graphics Research.  9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisites: CS/CNS 171, or 173, or 174.  The course will go over recent research results in computer graphics, covering subjects  from mesh processing (acquisition, compression, smoothing, param -rendering (both photo- and nonphotorealistic), geometric modeling  primitives (image based, point based), and motion capture and editing.  553Other subjects may be treated as they appear in the recent literature.  The goal of the course is to bring students up to the frontiers of com -puter graphics research and prepare them for their own research. Not    -tions. 9 units (3-3-3); second term. Working knowledge of multivariate     -sional algebraic and computational topology, Morse theory, Noether™s     -formal surface deformations, computation of geodesics, tangent vector   CS/IDS 178. Numerical Algorithms and their Implementation. 9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisites: CS 2.  This course gives students the understanding necessary to choose and implement basic numerical algorithms as needed in everyday programming practice. Concepts in -     CS 179. GPU Programming.  9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisites:  Good working knowledge of C/C++. graphics algorithms preferred. The use of Graphics Processing Units for  computer graphics rendering is well known, but their power for general   CPU algorithms. This course covers programming techniques for the   mechanics, and signal processing. The course will use nVidia™s parallel   - CS 180. Master™s Thesis Research.  Units (total of 45) are determined  in accordance with work accomplished.  Bi/BE/CS 183. Introduction to Computational Biology and Bioinfor -matics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biology. Computer Science554CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. Vision: From Computational Theory to  Neuronal Mechanisms.  12 units (4-4-4). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187. Neural Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. BE/CS/CNS/Bi 191 ab. Biomolecular Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Bioengineering.BE/CS 196 ab. Design and Construction of Programmable Molecu -lar Systems. 12 units ; a (3-6-3) second term; b (2-8-2). For course description, see Bioengineering.Ph/CS 219 abc. Quantum Computation. third terms.  For course description, see Physics. CS 274 abc. Topics in Computer Graphics.  second, third terms. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  Each term will focus on some topic in computer graphics, such as geometric model-ing, rendering, animation, human-computer interaction, or mathematical  foundations. The topics will vary from year to year. May be repeated for   CS 280. Research in Computer Science.  Units in accordance with  work accomplished. Approval of student™s research adviser and option  adviser must be obtained before registering.  CS 282 abc. Reading in Computer Science. 6 units or more by ar - Instructor™s permission required.  CS 286 abc. Seminar in Computer Science. 3, 6, or 9 units, at the instructor™s discretion.  Instructor™s permission required. CS 287. Center for the Mathematics of Information Seminar.  3, 6, or   Instruc- COMPUTING AND MATHEMATICAL  SCIENCES CMS/ACM/IDS 107. Linear Analysis with Applications. 12 units  or equivalent. Covers the basic algebraic, geometric, and topological properties of normed linear spaces, inner-product spaces, and linear maps. Emphasis is placed both on rigorous mathematical development and on applications to control theory, data analysis and partial differential  equations. Instructor: Stuart.555CMS/ACM/IDS 113. Mathematical Optimization. term. Prerequisites: ACM 11 and ACM 104, or instructor™s permis -sion.    problems; as well as applications to problems arising in graphs and  networks, information theory, control, signal processing, and other engi -CMS/ACM 117. Probability Theory and Stochastic Processes.  12  or instructor™s permission.  This course offers a rigorous introduction to  probability and stochastic processes. Emphasis is placed on the interac-tion between inequalities and limit theorems, as well as contemporary applications in computing and mathematical sciences. Topics include  probability measures, random variables and expectation, independence, concentration inequalities, distances between probability measures, modes of convergence, laws of large numbers and central limit theorem, Gaussian and Poisson approximation, conditional expectation and con-Tropp. CMS/ACM/EE 122. Mathematical Optimization. term.  -sion. This class studies mathematical optimization from the viewpoint of convexity. Topics covered include duality and representation of convex  network, and robust optimization; relaxation methods for intractable problems; as well as applications to problems arising in graphs and net-works, information theory, control, signal processing, and other engineer -ing disciplines. Instructor: Chandrasekaran.CMS/CS/IDS 139. Analysis and Design of Algorithms. 12 units (3-0-9); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 3, Ma/CS 6a, CS 21, CS  38/138, and ACM/EE/IDS 116 or CMS/ACM/IDS 113 or equivalent. This course develops core principles for the analysis and design of algo -performance in terms of resources, such as time, space, and random -ness. The course introduces the major paradigms for algorithm design,  including greedy methods, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming,   - CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144. Networks: Structure & Economics.  12 units (3-4-5); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 3, Ma/CS 6 a, and CS  38, or instructor permission. Social networks, the web, and the internet  are essential parts of our lives, and we depend on them every day. This  course studies how they work and the ﬁbigﬂ ideas behind our networked  (and why do they all look the same)?; How do search engines work?;  Computing and Mathematical Sciences556Why do memes spread the way they do?; How does web advertis -ing work? For all these questions and more, the course will provide a     CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining.  12 units (3-3-6); second term. Prerequisites: CS/CNS/EE 156 a.  Having a  and statistics, is highly recommended. This course will cover popular  methods in machine learning and data mining, with an emphasis on  developing a working understanding of how to apply these methods in practice. The course will focus on basic foundational concepts underpinning and motivating modern machine learning and data min -ing approaches. We will also discuss recent research developments..   CMS 270. Advanced Topics in Computing and Mathematical Sci -ences. Units by arrangement; second term. Advanced topics that will vary according to student and instructor interest. May be repeated for   CMS 290 abc. Computing and Mathematical Sciences Colloquium.  students in the CMS department only.  This course is a research seminar  course covering topics at the intersection of mathematics, computa-tion, and their applications. Students are asked to attend one seminar  per week (from any seminar series on campus) on topics related to  computing and mathematical sciences. This course is a requirement for  CMS 300. Research in Computing and Mathematical Sciences.  Hours and units by arrangement.   -CONTROL AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  CDS 90 abc. Senior Thesis in Control and Dynamical Systems.  9  112 (may be taken concurrently).  Research in control and dynamical  systems, supervised by a Caltech faculty member. The topic selection is  determined by the adviser and the student and is subject to approval by     557CDS 110. Introduction to Feedback Control Systems.  9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisites: Ma 1abc and Ma 2/102 or equivalents.  An introduction to analysis and design of feedback control systems, includ -  transfer functions. Stability and performance of interconnected systems,  including use of block diagrams, Bode plots, the Nyquist criterion, and Lyapunov functions. Design of feedback controllers in state space and  frequency domain based on stability, performance and robustness  CDS 112. Optimal Control and Estimation.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: CDS 110 (or equivalent) and CDS 131.  -tion-based design of control systems, including optimal control and   - CDS 131. Linear Systems Theory.   -sites: Ma 1b, Ma 2, ACM/IDS 104 or equivalent (may be taken concur-rently).   Properties of linear systems, including stability, performance, robust -ness. Reachability, observability, minimality, state and output-feedback.  CDS 141. Network Control Systems.  9 units (3-2-4); third term.  Variety  of case studies and projects from control, communication and comput - particularly smartgrid, internet, sensorimotor control, cell biology, medi -   CDS 190. Independent Work in Control and Dynamical Systems.   Prerequisite: CDS 110.  Research project in control and dynamical sys -tems, supervised by a CDS faculty member. CDS 231. Robust Control Theory.  9 units (3-2-4); second term. Prerequisites: CMS/ACM/IDS 107, CMS/ACM/IDS 113, and CDS 131  (or equivalents).   -ing noise, disturbances, parametric uncertainty, unmodeled dynam -  domain. Synthesis of robust control systems. Co-design of sparse and  -  -Control and Dynamical Systems 558 of squares, global stability, regions of attraction. Motivation throughout  from case studies from tech, neuro, bio, and socioeconomic networks,   CDS 232. Nonlinear Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: CMS/ACM/ IDS107 and CDS 231. This course studies nonlinear   stability of nonlinear systems from the perspective of Lyapunov, and   ME/CDS/EE 234 ab. Advanced Robotics. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.CDS 233. Nonlinear Control.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites:  CDS 231 and CDS 232. This course studies nonlinear control systems     - -ity of periodic orbits, controller synthesis through virtual constraints,  safety-critical controllers, and the role of physical constraints and actua -tor limits. The control of robotic systems will be used as a motivating  CDS 242. Hybrid Systems: Dynamics and Control.  9 units (3-2-4); third term. Prerequisites: CDS 231 and CDS 232.  This class studies  -tinuous dynamics. This includes topics on dynamic properties unique  and behavior. Additionally, the nonlinear control of these systems will be   -nov functions. Applications to mechanical systems undergoing impacts  will be considered, with a special emphasis on bipedal robotic walking.   CDS 243. Adaptive Control.  4 units (2-0-2); third term. Prerequisites:  CDS 231 AND CDS 232.  that operate in the presence of uncertainties and unforeseen events.  Robust and optimal linear control methods, including LQR, LQG and  LTR control. Design and analysis of model reference adaptive control    4 units (2-0-2); third term. Prerequi -sites: CDS 231 and CDS 232. Mathematical treatment of system iden -559 predictors and state observers. Parameter estimation in the presence  of non-parametric uncertainties. Introduction to adaptive control.   Not  Ae/CDS/ME 251 ab. Closed Loop Flow Control.  9 units; (3-0-6 a, 1-3-5 b). For course description, see Aerospace. CDS 270. Advanced Topics in Systems and Control.  Hours and units by arrangement. Topics dependent on class interests and instructor.  May be repeated for credit. CDS 300 abc. Research in Control and Dynamical Systems.  Hours and units by arrangement.  - - ECONOMICSEc 11. Introduction to Economics.  An introduction to economic methodology, models, and institutions.  Includes both basic microeconomics and an introduction to modern ap -proaches to macroeconomic issues. Students are required to participate  FS/Ec 19. Freshman Seminar: Thinking like an Economist.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Freshman Seminar. BEM/Ec/PS 80. Frontiers in Social Sciences. . For course description, see Business, Economics and Management.Ec 97. Undergraduate Research.  Units to be arranged; any term. Prerequisites: Advanced economics and instructor™s permission.  This  - Ec 98 abc. Senior Research and Thesis.  Prerequisite: instructor™s per -mission. Senior economics majors wishing to undertake research may  such work under the direction of a member of the economics faculty.  Ec 101. Selected Topics in Economics.  Units to be determined by  Topics to be   Ec 105. Firms, Competition, and Industrial Organization.  9 units (3-0-  A study of how technol- Economics560  particular industriesŠespecially those related  to internet commerceŠin   -fered 2021-2022. Ec 108. Foundations of Behavioral Economics. term. uncertainty, choice in market settings (i.e., buying and selling), and oth -ers. In each topic area we will begin by providing the standard neo -  neoclassical models are plausible by calling upon psychological insights  models, behavioral economics models, in each setting. These models,  Sprenger. Ec 109. Frontiers in Behavioral Economics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ec 11.  This course will study topics in behavioral economics demonstrating departures from the classic economics as -sumptions of rationality and pure self-interest. We will study evidence  of these departures, models that have been designed to capture these  preferences, and applications of these models to important economic  questions. Topics will include biases and heuristics, risk preferences,  self-control, strategic uncertainty, and social preferences, among oth -ers. The course will be based in readings from both classic and modern  research. Methodologically, the course will combine both theoretical  Nielsen.Ec/ACM/CS 112. Bayesian Statistics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 3, ACM/EE/IDS 116 or equivalent.  This course pro -vides an introduction to Bayesian Statistics and its applications to data   models, hierarchical models, model comparison, and MCMC methods.  The course combines an introduction to basic theory with a hands-on  emphasis on learning how to use these methods in practice so that  students can apply them in their own work. Previous familiarity with   Ec 117. Matching Markets. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  We will tackle   allocating students to schools, and matching donors to patients in the  -mal models, we will also reason about the practical implications of the   561BEM/Ec/ESE 119. Environmental Economics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Business, Economics, and Management.Ec 121 ab. Theory of Value.   -uisites: Ec 11 and Ma 1b (may be taken concurrently).  A study of con-sumer preference, the structure and conduct of markets, factor pricing,    Ec 122. Econometrics.  The application of statistical techniques to the analysis of economic Ec 123. Analysis of Consumer Choices. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: Ec 122 or permission of the instructor.  This course uses set of alternatives. Discrete choice models have been used to under -stand consumer behavior in many domains - shopping between brands (Toyota vs. BMW), where to go to college (Caltech or MIT), choosing  between modes of transportation (car, metro, Uber, or bicycle), etc.   Simulation techniques that allow estimation of otherwise intractable  9 units (3- 0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ec 122.  Statistical inference in the   assumptions to draw conclusions about the world we live in. We then  make decisions, for better or for worse, based on these conclusions.  -tions about the data generating process can lead to strong but often  less than credible (perhaps incredible?) conclusions about our world.  Weaker assumptions can lead to weaker but more credible conclusions.    -  IDS/Ec/PS 126. Applied Data Analysis.  -requisites: Math 3/103 or ACM/EE/IDS 116, Ec 122 or IDS/ACM/CS 157  or Ma 112a. For course description, see Information and Data Sciences.Ec 129. Economic History of the United States. 9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term. Prerequisite: Ec 11. quantitative tools and their application to American economic develop- 2022.Ec 130. Economic History of Europe from the Middle Ages to the  Twentieth Century.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: Ec 11.  Economics562Employs the theoretical and quantitative techniques of economics to   area between 1000 and 1980. Topics include the rise of commerce, the  demographic transition, the Industrial Revolution, and changes in in-equality, international trade, social spending, property rights, and capital   Ec 135. Economics of Uncertainty and Information. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ec 11. -ty and information on economic decisions. Included among the topics  -Agranov. Ec 136. Behavioral Decision Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: Ma 3. Ec 121 is recommended as background, but is not  a prerequisite.  This course is an intermediate-level class on individual-level theory. The method used posits precise assumptions about  mathematically convenient terms. We will cover both the traditional ﬁra -tional™™ approach, and more recent ﬁbehavioral™™ models that incorporate  psychological principles, in domains of intertemporal choice, random (stochastic) choice, menu choice, and revealed preferences. Students    Ec 140. Economic Progress.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Ec 11; Ec 122 recommended.  -temporary literature on economic growth and development from both   historical overview of economic progress and the lack thereof; simple  -lation; endogenous growth models; empirical tests of convergence; the  measurement and role of technological advancement; and the role of  trade, institutions, property rights, human capital, and culture. Instruc -CS/Ec 149. Algorithmic Economics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Computer Science.Ec/PS 160 abc. Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences. 9  Section a required for sections b   sciences with particular reference to work done in social psychology,  economics, and political science. Students are required to design and  563PS/Ec 172. Game Theory.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Political Science. ESE/ME/EST/Ec/ChE 179. Climate Change Impacts, Mitigation and Adaptation. 3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.Ec 181 ab. Convex Analysis and Economic Theory.  9 units (3-0-6);   Intro - -  Fenchel conjugates, saddlepoint theorem, theorems of the alternative,  polyhedra, linear programming, and duality in graphs. Introduction to   --tions to core convergence, cost and production functions, mathematical   2021-2022.ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING EE 1. The Science of Data, Signals, and Information. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Electrical Engineering has given rise to many key develop-ments at the interface between the physical world and the information world. Fundamental ideas in data acquisition, sampling, signal repre -engineering.This course introduces these ideas and discusses signal  representations, the interplay between time and frequency domains,   - and neural networks, and how humans interpret data and information.  Applications in various areas of science and engineering are covered.   - EE 2. Electrical Engineering Entrepreneurial and Research Seminar.  1 unit; second term. Required for EE undergraduates.  Weekly seminar  given by successful entrepreneurs and EE faculty, broadly describ -  devices, images and vision, information theory, learning and pattern  recognition, MEMS and micromachining, networks, electromagnetics  and opto-electronics, RF and microwave circuits and antennas, robotics    FS/EE 5. Introduction to Waves.  (1-5-0); third term.  For course de-scription, see Freshman Seminars. Electrical Engineering564EE/ME 7. Introduction to Mechatronics.  Mechatronics is the multi-disciplinary design of electro-mechanical  systems. This course is intended to give the student a basic introduc -tion to such systems. The course will focus on the implementations of sensor and actuator systems, the mechanical devices involved and the electrical circuits needed to interface with them. The class will consist of  lectures and short labs where the student will be able to investigate the   -electric devices, light sensors, ultrasonic transducers, and navigational   APh/EE 9 ab. Solid-State Electronics for Integrated Circuits.  6 units (2-2-2). For course description, see Applied Physics.EE/CS 10 ab. Introduction to Digital Logic and Embedded Systems.  6 units (2-3-1); second, third terms.  This course is intended to give the student a basic understanding of the major hardware and software prin -The course will cover basic digital logic, programmable logic devices,  CPU and embedded system architecture, and embedded systems pro -gramming principles (interfacing to hardware, events, user interfaces,   EE 13. Electronic System Prototyping.  This course is intended to introduce the student to the technologies and  techniques used to fabricate electronic systems. The course will cover  the skills needed to use standard CAD tools for circuit prototyping. This  includes schematic capture and printed circuit board design. Additional -ly, soldering techniques will be covered for circuit fabrication as well as  some basic debugging skills. Each student will construct a system from   APh/EE 23. Demonstration Lectures in Classical and Quantum Pho -tonics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics. APh/EE 24. Introductory Optics and Photonics Laboratory.  9 units (1-3-5). For course description, see Applied Physics. EE 40. Physics of Electrical Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course provides an introduction to the fundamental physics  of modern device technologies in electrical engineering used for sens -ing, communications, computing, imaging, and displays. The course overviews topics including semiconductor physics, quantum mechan-ics, electromagnetics, and optics with emphasis on physical operation  optical and wireless communications, micromechanical systems, lasers,   EE 44. Deterministic Analysis of Systems and Circuits.  12 units  565with Ma 2 and Ph 2 a. Modeling of physical systems by conversion to mathematical abstractions with an emphasis on electrical systems. Introduction to deterministic methods of system analysis, including   responses, signal superposition and convolution, Heaviside operator   from the electrical circuits (e.g., energy and data converters, wired and  wireless communication channels, instrumentation, and sensing) , while   - EE 45. Electronics Systems and Laboratory.  12 units (3-3-6); third  term. Prerequisites: EE 44.  Fundamentals of electronic circuits and sys -tems. Lectures on diodes, transistors, small-signal analysis, frequency-  - communication systems. Laboratory sessions on transient response,  steady-state sinusoidal response and phasors, diodes, transistors,  EE 55. Mathematics of Electrical Engineering. term. Prerequisites: Ma 1abc.  Linear algebra and probability are funda -mental to many areas of study in electrical engineering. This class pro -vides the mathematical foundations of these topics with a view to their utility to electrical engineers. Topics include vector spaces, matrices  and linear transformations, the singular value decomposition, elementa-ry probability and random variables, common distributions that arise in  - CS/EE/ME 75 abc. Multidisciplinary Systems Engineering. 3 units (2-6-1), or 12 units (2-9-1) second and third terms;  For course descrip-tion, see Computer Science. EE 80 abc. Senior Thesis.  -uisite: instructor™s permission, which should be obtained during the   Individual research project, carried out under the supervision of a member of the  electrical engineering or computer science faculty. Project must include   electrical engineering, computer science, or electrical and computer  EE 85. Analog and RF Circuits Laboratory.  9 units ( 2-3-4); second term. Prerequisites: EE 45 or equivalent . A structured lecture and labo -ratory course to enhance students™ skills in designing analog and RF cir-Electrical Engineering566cuits and further develop their thought process as hands-on engineers.   EE 90. Analog Electronics Project Laboratory.  9 units (1-8-0); third  term. Prerequisites: EE 40 and EE 45.  A structured laboratory course  that gives the student the opportunity to design and build a simple ana-log electronics project. The goal is to gain familiarity with circuit design  and construction, component selection, CAD support, and debugging EE 91. Experimental Projects in Electronic Circuits.  9 units (1-8- EE/MedE 114 ab (may be taken concurrently).  Open to seniors; others only with instructor™s permission.  An opportunity to do advanced original projects in analog or digital electronics and electronic circuits.     EE 99. Advanced Work in Electrical Engineering.  Units to be ar-ranged. Special problems relating to electrical engineering will be  arranged. For undergraduates; students should consult with their advis -EE 105 abc. Electrical Engineering Seminar.   terms. All candidates for the M.S. degree in electrical engineering are  required to attend any graduate seminar in any division each week of  ACM/EE 106 ab. Introductory Methods of Computational Mathemat-ics. ; For course description, see Applied and Computa-tional Mathematics.APh/EE 109. Introduction to the Micro/Nanofabrication Lab.  9 units (0-6-3). For course description, see Applied Physics. EE 110 abc. Embedded Systems Design Laboratory.  9 units (3-4-2);  The student will design, build, and program a   - embedded system design, electronic circuit construction techniques,  modern development facilities, and embedded systems programming.  The lectures cover topics in embedded system design such as display  technologies, interfacing to analog signals, communication protocols,  PCB design, and programming in high-level and assembly languages.   EE 111. Signal-Processing Systems and Transforms.  9 units (3-0- An introduction to continuous and  discrete time signals and systems with emphasis on digital signal  567processing systems. Study of the Fourier transform, Fourier series,  -cal engineering. Sampling theorems for continuous to discrete-time    steady state responses, and connections to other areas in science and   EE 112. Introduction to Signal Processing from Data.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: EE 111 or equivalent. Math 3 recommend -ed.   -  Nyquist and sub-Nyquist sampling, sensor array signal processing,  estimating direction of arrival (DOA) information from noisy data, and   EE 113. Feedback and Control Circuits.  9 units (3-3-3); third term.  Prerequisites: EE 45 or equivalent.  This class studies the design and implementation of feedback and control circuits. The course begins  with an introduction to basic feedback circuits, using both op amps and  transistors. These circuits are used to study feedback principles, includ -ing circuit topologies, stability, and compensation. Following this, basic  control techniques and circuits are studied, including PID (Proportional-    EE/MedE 114 ab. Analog Circuit Design.  12 units (4-0-8); second, third terms. Prerequisites: EE 44 or equivalent.  Analysis and design of analog circuits at the transistor level. Emphasis on design-oriented  analysis, quantitative performance measures, and practical circuit  limitations. Circuit performance evaluated by hand calculations and  computer simulations. Recommended for juniors, seniors, and graduate  -  -   supply and temperature independent biasing. A number of the follow -   EE/MedE 115. Micro-/Nano-scales Electro-Optics.  9 units (3-0-6);  of the instructor.  The course will cover various electro-optical phenome -Electrical Engineering568 -ties of light, imaging, aberrations, eyes, detectors, lasers, micro-optical   -  ACM/EE/IDS 116.  Introduction to Probability Models. . For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics.ME/EE/EST 117. Energy Technology and Policy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ph/APh/EE/BE 118 ab.  Physics of Measurement. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Physics.EE/CS 119 abc. Advanced Digital Systems Design. 9 units (3-3-3);  or CS 24. Advanced digital design as it applies to the design of systems using PLDs and ASICs (in particular, gate arrays and standard cells).  The course covers both design and implementation details of various systems and logic device technologies. The emphasis is on the practical  aspects of ASIC design, such as timing, testing, and fault grading. Top -ics include synchronous design, state machine design, ALU and CPU  -ability, PALs, FPGAs, VHDL, standard cells, timing analysis, fault vec - both systems discussed in the class as well as self-proposed systems  using a variety of technologies and tools. Given in alternate years; Not   EE/APh 120. Physical Optics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.    Course focuses on applying linear systems analysis on propagation of light waves. Contents begin with a review of Electromagnetic theory of diffraction and transitions to Fourier Optics for  a scalar-wave treatment of propagation, diffraction, and image formation  with coherent and incoherent light. In addition to problems in imaging, the course makes connections to a selected number of topics in optics where the mathematics of wave phenomena plays a central role. Ex-non-diffracting beams, Fabry-Perrot cavities, and angular momentum of  light. Areas of application include modern imaging, display, and beam  shaping technologies. Instructor: Mirhosseini.EE 121. Computational Signal Processing.   EE 111, ACM/EE/IDS 116, ACM/IDS 104. The role of computation in  the acquisition, representation, and processing of signals. The course  with an emphasis on the interplay between structure, algorithms, and  569covered include deterministic and stochastic signal models, statisti - arising in contemporary applications in the sciences and engineering are discussed, although the focus is on the common abstractions and  methodological frameworks that are employed in the solution of these   CMS/ACM/EE 122. Mathematical Optimization. 12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.EE/APh 123. Advanced Lasers and Photonics Laboratory.  9 units  This course focuses on hands- and photonics. Students have the opportunity to build and run several  microscopy, spectroscopy, nonlinear optics, quantum optics, ultrafast  optics, adaptive optics, and integrated photonics. Limited enrollment.  EE/MedE 124. Mixed-mode Integrated Circuits.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: EE 45 a or equivalent. I ntroduction to selected   technologies. Design challenges and limitations in current and future  technologies will be discussed through topics such as clocking (PLLs  and DLLs), clock distribution networks, sampling circuits, high-speed    EE/CS/MedE 125. Digital Electronics and Design with FPGAs  and VHDL. 9 units (3-6-0); third term.  Prerequisites: EE/CS 10 or  equivalent. Study of programmable logic devices (CPLDs and FPGAs).  Detailed study of the VHDL language, with basic and advanced applica-tions. Review and discussion of digital design principles for combina-tional-logic, combinational-arithmetic, sequential, and state-machine circuits. Detailed tutorials for synthesis and simulation tools using  FPGAs and VHDL. Wide selection of complete, real-world fundamental  advanced projects, including theory, design, simulation, and physical  implementation. All designs are implemented using state-of-the-art    EE/Ma/CS 126 ab. Information Theory.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 3.  Shannon's mathematical theory of commu- for discrete and continuous random variables. Shannon's source and  channel coding theorems. Mathematical models for information sources  and communication channels, including memoryless, Markov, ergodic,  and Gaussian. Calculation of capacity and rate-distortion functions. Universal source codes. Side information in source coding and com -munications. Network information theory, including multiuser data com -pression, multiple access channels, broadcast channels, and multiter -Electrical Engineering570minal networks. Discussion of philosophical and practical implications   research in information theory, coding theory, wireless communications,    EE/Ma/CS/IDS 127. Error-Correcting Codes. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  principles the theory and practical implementation of the most impor-tant techniques for combating errors in digital transmission or storage systems. Topics include highly symmetric linear codes, such as Ham -ming, Reed-Muller, and Polar codes; algebraic block codes, e.g., BCH,  Reed-Solomon (including a self-contained introduction to the theory of code and turbo codes. Students will become acquainted with encoding and decoding algorithms, design principles and performance evaluation of codes. Instructor: Kostina.EE 128 ab. Selected Topics in Digital Signal Processing.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisites: EE 111 and EE/CS/IDS 160  or equivalent required, and EE 112 or equivalent recommended.  The course focuses on several important topics that are basic to modern  signal processing. Topics include multirate signal processing material  - signal processing material such as linear prediction and antenna array  processing, and signal processing for communication including optimal   ME/CS/EE 129. Experimental Robotics. 9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.APh/EE 130. Electromagnetic Theory.  For course description, see Applied Physics. EE/APh 131. Light Interaction with Atomic SystemsŠLasers. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: APh/EE 130.  Light-matter interac-tion, spontaneous and induced transitions in atoms and semiconduc-Principles of laser oscillation, generic types of lasers including semi-conductor lasers, mode-locked lasers. Frequency combs in lasers. The   APh/EE 132. Special Topics in Photonics and Optoelectronics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Applied Physics. ME/CS/EE 133 abc. Robotics. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.571ME/CS/EE 134. Robotic Systems. 9 units (3-6-0). For course descrip-tion, see Mechanical Engineering.EE/CS/EST 135. Power System Analysis. Prerequisites: EE 44, Ma 2, or equivalent.  Basic power system analy-  problems, swing dynamics and stability. Current research topics such    - EE/Ma/CS/IDS 136. Topics in Information Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Ma 3 or ACM/EE/IDS 116 or CMS 117 or  Ma/ACM/IDS 140a. This class introduces information measures such as  entropy, information divergence, mutual information, information density  from a probabilistic point of view, and discusses the relations of those  quantities to problems in data compression and transmission, statistical  inference, language modeling, game theory and control. Topics include   hypothesis testing, single-shot approach in information theory, large   CS/EE/IDS 143. Communication Networks. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Computer Science.CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144. Networks: Structure & Economics.  12 units (3-4-5). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sci-ences.CS/EE 145. Projects in Networking.  9 units (0-0-9). For course de-scription, see Computer Science. CS/EE 146. Control and Optimization of Networks.  9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Computer Science. EE/CS 147. Digital Ventures Design.   -requisites: none.  of analysis, design, development, and launching of innovative digital products and study elements of their success and failure. The course   based design, engineering, and entrepreneurship. The lectures present  a disciplined step-by-step approach to develop new ventures based on  technological innovation in this space, and with invited speakers, cover  core competency and competitive position, customer acquisition, busi -ness model design, unit economics and viability, and product planning.  Throughout the term students will work within an interdisciplinary team  of their peers to conceive an innovative digital product concept and  produce a business plan and a working prototype. The course project  Electrical Engineering572 course and projects focus on a particular emerging technology theme.   EE/CNS/CS 148. Selected Topics in Computational Vision.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: undergraduate calculus, linear algebra,  geometry, statistics, computer programming.  The class will focus on an  -  involving the design, implementation, and testing of a vision system.  EE/APh 149. Frontiers of Nonlinear Photonics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course overviews recent advances in photonics with empha -nonlinearities in the classical and quantum regimes is covered, including  but not limited to second- and third-order nonlinear susceptibilities,  Kerr, Raman, optomechanical, thermal, and multi-photon nonlinearities.  A wide range of photonic platforms is also considered ranging from bulk  to ultrafast and integrated photonics. The course includes an overview of the concepts as well as review and discussion of recent literature and   EE 150. Topics in Electrical Engineering.  Units to be arranged; terms to be arranged. Content will vary from year to year, at a level suitable for  advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate students. Topics will be    EE 151. Electromagnetic Engineering.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Pre -requisite: EE 45.     EE 152. High Frequency Systems Laboratory.  term. Prerequisites: EE 45 or equivalent. EE 153 recommended.  The student will develop a strong, working knowledge of high-frequency  systems covering RF and microwave frequencies. The essential building  blocks of these systems will be studied along with the fundamental focus on the design and measurement of core system building blocks;   -duce key concepts followed by weekly laboratory sessions where the  During the second part of the course, the student will develop their own high-frequency system, focused on a topic within remote sensing, com - Russell. 573EE 153. Microwave Circuits and Antennas.  12 units (3-2-7); third term.  Prerequisite: EE 45.  High-speed circuits for wireless communications,  radar, and broadcasting. Design, fabrication, and measurements of    EE 154 ab. Practical Electronics for Space Applications.  9 units (2-3-4); second and third terms.   -ment, including an understanding of the space environment, common     - CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences. CS/CNS/EE 156 ab. Learning Systems.  9 units (3-1-5). For course description, see Computer Science. EE/Ae 157 ab. Introduction to the Physics of Remote Sensing.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ph 2 or equivalent.  An  overview of the physics behind space remote sensing instruments.  Topics include the interaction of electromagnetic waves with natural  surfaces, including scattering of microwaves, microwave and thermal   natural surfaces and atmospheres in the near-infrared and visible re -gions of the spectrum. The class also discusses the design of modern  space sensors and associated technology, including sensor design,  new observation techniques, ongoing developments, and data inter- planetology, oceanography, astronomy, and atmospheric research.  Ge/EE/ESE 157 c. Remote Sensing for Environmental and Geologi -cal Applications. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.EE/APh 158. Quantum Electrical Circuits.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: advanced-level familiarity with Maxwell™s electro -magnetic theory and quantum mechanics (EE 151 and Ph 125 abc, or equivalent). Course focuses on superconducting electrical systems for  quantum computing. Contents begin with reviewing required concepts  in microwave engineering, quantum optics, and superconductivity, and  Electrical Engineering574proceeds with deriving quantum mechanical description of supercon - The second part of the course provides an overview of integrated   applications in transducing quantum electrical signals in conjunction  CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159. Advanced Topics in Machine Learning.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computer Science. EE/CS/IDS 160. Fundamentals of Information Transmission and  Storage. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. -tropy, mutual information, source and channel coding theorems. Basics   and storage, block codes, algebraic codes, sparse graph codes. Basics EE/CS 161. Big Data Networks. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequi -sites: Linear Algebra ACM/IDS 104 and Introduction to Probability Mod -els ACM/EE/IDS 116 or their equivalents. have tens of billions of nodes forming cyber-physical systems and the   challenges must be overcome to deliver on this vision. This course will   role of network coding, distributed storage, and distributed caching; (2)  How to manage wireless access on a massive scale; modern random  data networks, including distributed computing over networks and crowdsourcing. A selected subset of these problems, their mathemati -cal underpinnings, state-of-the-art solutions, and challenges ahead will  Hassibi. EE 163. Communication Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prereq -uisites: EE 111; ACM/EE/IDS 116 or equivalent. Mathematical models of communication processes; signals and noise as random processes;  sampling; modulation; spectral occupancy; intersymbol interference;   ratio and error probability in digital baseband and carrier communica -sequence estimation; multipath channels; parameter estimation; hy-pothesis testing; optical communication systems. Capacity measures;  multiple antenna and multiple carrier communication systems; wireless   EE 164. Stochastic and Adaptive Signal Processing.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: ACM/EE/IDS 116 or equivalent.  Fundamentals of linear estimation theory are studied, with applications to stochas -tic and adaptive signal processing. Topics include deterministic and  575stochastic least-squares estimation, the innovations process, Wiener      CS/CNS/EE/IDS 165. Foundations of Machine Learning and Statisti -cal Inference.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computer Science.CS/EE/IDS 166. Computational Cameras. 12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computer Science.EE/CS/IDS 167. Introduction to Data Compression and Storage.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ma 3 or ACM/EE/IDS 116.  The course will introduce the students to the basic principles and  techniques of codes for data compression and storage. The students  will master the basic algorithms used for lossless and lossy compres -sion of digital and analog data and the major ideas behind coding for  -form coding; codes for constrained storage systems. Given in alternate   MedE/EE/BE 168 abc. Biomedical Optics: Principles and Imaging. 9 units (4-0-5). For course description, see Medical Engineering.ME/CS/EE 169. Mobile Robots. 9 units (2-7-0). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.ACM/EE/IDS 170. Mathematics of Signal Processing.  12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics.EE/CS/MedE 175. Digital Circuits Analysis and Design with Com -plete VHDL and RTL Approach.  9 units (3-6-0); third term. Prerequi -sites: medium to advanced knowledge of digital electronics.  A careful  balance between synthesis and analysis in the development of digital circuits plus a truly complete coverage of the VHDL language. The RTL  (register transfer level) approach. Study of FPGA devices and com -parison to ASIC alternatives. Tutorials of software and hardware tools    review of combinational circuits followed by full VHDL coverage for  combinational circuits plus recommended design practices. Detailed re -view of sequential circuits followed by full VHDL coverage for sequential  circuits plus recommended design practices. Detailed review of state  machines followed by full VHDL coverage and recommended design  practices. Construction of VHDL libraries. Hierarchical design and prac -tice on the hard task of project splitting. Automated simulation using  Electrical Engineering576VHDL testbenches. Designs are implemented in state-of-the-art FPGA   EE/APh 180. Nanotechnology.  This course  -ent trends towards building devices and structures on the nanometer   communications, data storage and sensing world will be described, and the underlying physics as well as limitations of the present technology   APh/EE 183. Physics of Semiconductors and Semiconductor De-vices. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics. EE/BE/MedE 185. MEMS Technology and Devices.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: APh/EE 9 ab, or instructor™s permission.  Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) have been broadly used for  biochemical, medical, RF, and lab-on-a-chip applications. This course  will cover both MEMS technologies (e.g., micro- and nanofabrication)    This course will also cover various MEMS devices used in microsensors    - CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. Vision: From Computational Theory to  Neuronal Mechanisms.  12 units (4-4-4). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.EE/MedE 187. VLSI and ULSI Technology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: APh/EE 9 ab, EE/APh 180 or instructor™s permission.  This  for the fabrication of ULSI including BJT, CMOS, and BiCMOS. Technol - deposition and etching, etc. Topics also include the use of chemistry,   BE/EE/MedE 189 ab. Design and Construction of Biodevices. 189 a,   Bioengineering.APh/EE 190 abc. Quantum Electronics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics.MedE/EE 268. Medical Imaging. 9 units (4-0-5); third term.  For course description, see Medical Engineering.577ME/CDS/EE 234 ab. Advanced Robotics. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.EE 291. Advanced Work in Electrical Engineering.  Units to be ar-ranged. Special problems relating to electrical engineering. Primarily for  graduate students; students should consult with their advisers. ENERGY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ME/EE/EST 117. Energy Technology and Policy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.EE/CS/EST 135. Power System Analysis. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.ESE/ME/EST/Ec/ChE 179. Climate Change Impacts, Mitigation and Adaptation. 3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.ENGINEERING (GENERAL) E 2. Frontiers in Engineering and Applied Science.  Open for credit to freshmen and sophomores. Weekly seminar by a  member of the EAS faculty to discuss their area of engineering and  group™s research at an introductory level. The course can be used to   VC/E 81. Careers in STEAM.  1 unit (1-0-0). For course description, see Visual Culture. E/VC 88. Critical Making. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course examines the concepts and practices of maker culture through hands-on engagement, guest workshops, lectures, reading and discussions on the relations between technology, culture and society. Classes may include  digital fabrication, physical computing, and other DIY technologies as   be covered from the study of maker culture, DIY culture, media, critical  theory, histories of science, design and art.  Instructor: Mushkin. E/H/VC 89. New Media Arts in the 20th and 21st Centuries. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: none. -ists™ work with new technology, fabrication methods and media from the   of the period will be surveyed. While considering this historical and criti- approaches to projects may involve robotics, electronics, computer  programming, computer graphics, mechanics and other technologies.  Engineering578Students will be responsible for designing and fabricating their own   -ism, digital art, robotics, telematics, media in performance, interactive  installation art, and technology in public space. Artists studied may include Eadweard Muybridge, Marcel Duchamp, Vladmir Tatlin, John  Cage, Jean Tinguely, Stelarc, Survival Research Laboratories, Lynne  Hershman Leeson, Edwardo Kac, Natalie Jeremenjenko, Heath Bunting,    E 100. Special Topics in Engineering Applied Science.  Units to be  -sites: none. Content may vary from year to year, at a level suitable for  advanced undergraduate or graduate students. Topics will be chosen to    9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course introduces students to the conceptual  frameworks, the analytical approaches, the personal understanding and  skills, and the actions required to launch a successful technology-based    -mining how best to implement those ideas in a startup venture, attract -ing the resources needed for a new venture (e.g., key people, corporate   structuring and negotiating important business relationships, and lead - E/SEC 103. Management of Technology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A course intended for students interested in learning how rapidly evolving  technologies are harnessed to produce useful products or fertile new  area for research. Students will work through Harvard Business School  case studies, supplemented by lectures to elucidate the key issues.  There will be a term project where students predict the future evolution    - fundamentals, integration into other business processes, product  development pipeline and portfolio management, learning curves, risk  assessment, technology trend methodologies (scenarios, projections),  motivation, rewards and recognition. Industries considered will include  electronics (hardware and software), aerospace, medical, biotech, etc.  Students will perform both primary and secondary research and through    2021-2022.E/ME/MedE 105 ab. Design for Freedom from Disability.  9 units (3-0- This Product Design  class focuses on people with Disabilities and is done in collaboration with Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center. Students visit  579 needs. Designs and testing are done in collaboration with Rancho as -sociates. Speakers include people with assistive needs, therapists and researchers. Classes teach normative design methodologies as adapted   E 110. Principles of University Teaching and Learning in STEM.  3 units (2-0-1); second term, third term.  the research on university-level STEM (science, technology, engineer -ing, and mathematics) teaching and learning, which has been used to  inform a well-established body of evidence-based teaching practices. Weekly interactive meetings will provide focused overviews and guided  application of key pedagogical research, such as prior knowledge and   - active learning, student engagement, and inclusive teaching practices  in designing classes where all students have an equal opportunity to  be successful and feel a sense of belonging, both in the course and as scientists. Readings will inform in-class work and students will apply    ENGLISH Hum/En 20. Ancient Epic. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 21. Monsters and Marvels. 9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities. Hum/En 22. Inequality.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 23. Literature and Medicine.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/En 25. The Human Animal. 9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Humanities. Hum/En 26. What Is Imagination? 9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Humanities.Hum/En 27. Literature and the Problem of Belief.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 28. Killing Kings and Popish Plots: Literature in Revolution -ary England. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.English580Hum/En 29. Dream Narratives.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 30. Reading Animals. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 31. Introduction to Black Literature and Culture in the  United States. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 33. Modern Metamorphoses.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 34. Literature and Deception.  9 units (3-0-6. For course description, see Humanities.Hum/En 36. American Literature and Culture.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.En/Wr 84.  Communicating Science to Non-Experts. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course offers instruction in writing and speaking about  science and technology for non-expert audiences. Instruction focuses on how to convey complex technical information in clear, engaging prose  and speech in a variety of contexts. Readings in different genres (e.g.,  the newspaper discovery story, the op-ed, the personal narrative, the  explainer talk) raise issues for discussion and serve as models for as-signments in these genres. The workshop-style nature of this course re -lies on drafting and revision in response to peer and instructor feedback. communications requirement for humanities majors. Instructor: Hall.En 85. Poetry Writing.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  When William Blake wrote ﬁto see a World in a Grain of Sand,ﬂ he tapped into poetry™s pow -er to model the universe. For instance, once we set up a simile between ﬁworldﬂ and ﬁgrain of sandﬂ, we can test this hypothesis of sameness. How is sand like the world? Where will the model fail? And what might  that tell us? Imagery, sensory language, arguments, ideas, and verse  form itself can lead poetry toward power and discovery. This pursuit can  reach from the page into one™s own life. We will work hard together on    En 86. Fiction Writing.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. The class is  -ing character, voice, setting, world building, scene, summary, plot, and   end of the course, students critique the work of their peers in small- 581En 89. Writing the News - Journalistic Writing.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term.   aspects of the craft, such as reporting and interviewing, theme and  scene, character and storytelling. It looks closely at how traditional print  rules, process and presentation. It looks at new media, its process and   produce numerous stories and other writing during the class, including   -tion in The California Tech. There may be visits by professional journal -En 98. Reading in English. 9 units (1-0-8). Prerequisite: instructor™s  permission. An individual program of directed reading in English or  American literature, in areas not covered by regular courses. En 98 is  intended primarily for English majors and minors. Interested students  should confer with an English faculty member and agree upon a topic   En 99 ab. Senior Tutorial for English Majors.  9 units (1-0-8). Students will study research methods and write a research paper. Required of   term. Well before the advent of the Machine Age, literary texts have  been populated by various kinds of ingenious automata, often in animal or human form. This course surveys the role of the automaton in literary  time, with a focus on the special case of the human machine. Read-ings from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to include texts by   Robotﬂ. Instructor: Holland.En 101. Recalling the Wild. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. City-dwellers invented the concept of wilderness, as a space apart from human laws and culture. This course takes a critical look at the different values  attributed to that space as it has been colonized by the human imagi-nation. Our discussions will focus on the emergence of the perception of wilderness in European literature in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but we conclude with the question: what meaning do we invest Buffon, Toqueville, Chateaubriand, Byron, Thoreau, Wells, and Lon -don. Instructor: Holland.En 103. Introduction to Medieval British Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); genres and works written in Britain prior to 1500. Far from a literary   English582form, bequeathing to modern literature some of its best-loved genres   Chaucer and his contemporaries-while we concentrate on the following  establish their authority? What kinds of historical and cultural currents   sinners, dranma, lyrics, romances, selections from Chaucer™s Canter -bury Tales, and Malory™s Morte Darthur. Readings will be in Middle and   En 104. Imagining the Medieval in the Nineteenth Century.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Following the Enlightenment and amidst the Industrial Revolution, the late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries saw a surging  interest in the literature, lives, art, and architecture of the Middle Ages.   monsters-as a way to think through the challenges-social, literary, politi -cal, aesthetic-of their own time. We will read several novels, poems,  and treatises, including Henry David Thoreau™s essay, ﬁWalking;ﬂ Mark   -nyson™s Idylls of the King; and others. Requirements for the course will   2022.En 105. Old English Literature.  ﬁMoððe word fræt.ﬂ Want to learn how to read the riddle that begins with these   -est form of the English language, spoken in England from roughly the    brutal defeat by a Viking army and another based on the biblical story of  Judith, who tricks the evil king Holofernes into sleeping with her-but not    completion of the course will give students a richer sense not only of the earliest period of English literature, but also of the English language    En 106. Poetry and the Project of Justice.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. This course explores how contemporary poets grapple with the most urgent questions of our moment: identity, equality, environmental  discussing, and writing about contemporary poems and will encounter recent and more distant traditions of protest poetry. We will ask how po -etic language articulates questions of embodiment, community, law, and  memory. The syllabus will focus in particular on writers of color, including  queer and indigenous poets, and will include opportunities to attend local poetry readings. Instructor: Jahner. Not offered 2021-2022. 583En 107. Medieval Romance. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The medi- romance, dedicated to the adventures of knights and ladies and the  villains, monsters, magic, and miles that stood in their way. This course    -  de Troyes, Marie de France, Gawain and the Green Knight, Arthurian   En/VC 108. Volcanoes.  Long before torrents   volcanic disaster narratives erupted across 19th-century British pages,   -tion with volcanoes in literary and visual culture and the socio-political  Shelley™s Frankenstein and Tambora™s infamous 1815 eruption, James  Pain™s 1880s pyrotechnic adaptation of Vesuvius™s 79AD eruption, and   Bird, M.P. Shiel, Charles Dickens, Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton, and J. M.    En 109. Madness and Reason. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Madness  human and the inhumane, reality and fantasy, sickness and health. One  -complish this? Which strategies, such as the use of irony and humor,    kind of madness in its own right? Selected readings from Shakespeare,   - En/VC 110.  Sinners, Saints, and Sexuality in Premodern Litera-ture. 9 units (3-0-6); This class explores the history of sexual-ity and gender across the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Exploring both  literary texts and visual representation, it considers how previous eras and cultures understood embodiment, sexuality, and gender and asks  how we, as modern readers and viewers, approach these questions across the distance of centuries. We will read across a wide range of   biography, and examine manuscript illustrations and other early visual  media. Questions we will take up include the following: how did writers and art authorize, scrutinize, or otherwise parse the boundaries of the  English584How do we approach and make use of earlier theories of sex and gen- En 111. Violence and Reconciliation on the Shakespearean Stage.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Sir Francis Bacon famously described in the drama of Shakespeare and his contemporaries: revenge for politi- misbehavior and dogmatism. But what of the experience of reconciliation  plays of Shakespeare, Marlowe, Jonson, Middleton, and Dryden allow us to consider how drama as text and performance engaged and continues to engage playgoers as they watch the religious, social, and political upheaval of their worlds mounted to the stage. Instructor: Koch. Not of-fered 2021-2022.En 112.  Nineteenth-Century American Poetry.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  We might ask any number of questions in response to Whitman. If the   our historical moment, this course will take seriously American life lived  within poetry and the lives poems lived across the country. Together,  we will track the development of American poetry as it engages with  enslavement, abolition, genocide, war, beauty, nature, racialization,  constructions of gender, sexuality, and affect. Ultimately, we will ask  what reading nineteenth-century American poetry, or nineteenth-century  America as a poem, might mean for our understanding of the country today. Readings will include Wheatley, Emerson, Bryant, Poe, Longfel -low, Oakes Smith, Schoolcraft (Bamewawagezhikaquay), Whitman,  Dickinson, Harper, and Dunbar amongst others.  Instructor: Hill.En 113. Shakespeare™s Career: Comedies and Histories.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.   Shakespeare™s career, his comedies and histories. Particular attention   - En 114. Shakespeare™s Career: Tragedies and Tragicomedies.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The second of a two-course sequence on Shake-speare™s career as a dramatist and poet. We will read works from the  second half of Shakespeare™s career, his tragedies, tragicomedies, and  Sonnets. Particular attention will be paid to Shakespeare™s use of his   585be taken independently and, usually, are taught in alternate years.  In- En/VC 117. Picturing the Universe. Whether you are a physicist, photographer, or bibliophile, grab a warm jacket.  The night sky beckons. In addition to observing and photographing our own starry skies, we will study 19th-century literary, artistic, and   decentered, and limitless. In Victorian England, picturing the universe in   -logical limitations of human observation and fueled larger debates about  objective evidence and subjective documentation. Authors studied   En 118. Classical Mythology.  Why did the Greeks and Romans remain fascinated with the same stories of gods  and demigods for more than a thousand years? On the other hand, how  the earliest Greek poems and advancing through classical Athens, Hel --ing poetry as a history of reading the past; the course also serves as an   include Homer™s ‚Odyssey,™ Hesiod, Aeschylus, Euripides, Apollonius   En 119. Displacement. The literary fascina-tion with people who change places, temporarily or permanently, over  a short distance or across the globe, in works dating from our lifetimes  and from the recent and the remote past. How readily can such stories  be compared, how easy is it to apply traditional categories of literary  evaluation, and, in the contemporary world, how have poetry and prose  works will receive considerable attention; other readings may include  Virgil, Swift, Flaubert, Mann, Achebe, Nabokov, Didion, Morrison.  En 120. What Women Want: Desire and the Modern American Nov -el. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. The question of what a woman wants animates a central strain of the modern American novel, as do evolving  ideas about what women can and cannot have. This course consid-    Authors covered may include Henry James, Edith Wharton, Theodore   - En 121. Literature and Its Readers.  The course will investigate readers who have made adventurous uses of  English586their favorite works of literature, from Greek antiquity through the 20th  century. Sometimes those readers count, at least temporarily, as literary  critics, as when the philosopher Aristotle made Sophocles™ Oedipus the King the central model in his wildly successful essay on the literary form   a meeting point for his theory of psychology, his vision of human societ -ies, and his fascination with literary narrative. It will discuss some basic questions about the phenomenon of literary reading. Does a book have    En 122. Early History of the Novel. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The re --tive in the 18th century? The realistic turn clearly attracted new classes  of readers, but did it also make the novel a better vehicle for comment -ing on society at large? Why were the formal conventions of realistic  writing so tightly circumscribed? Authors may include Cervantes, Defoe,   Haugen.En 123. The 19th-Century English Novel. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A survey of the 19th-century novel from Austen through Conrad, with  special emphasis upon the Victorians. Major authors may include Aus -ten, Shelley, Dickens, Eliot, Thackeray, Gaskell, Brontë, Collins, Trollope,   En 124. 20th-Century British Fiction. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A sur-vey of the 20th-century British and Irish novel, from the modernist novel  to the postcolonial novel. Major authors may include Conrad, Joyce,  2021-2022.En 125. British Romantic Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. A selective survey of English writing in the late 18th and early 19th centu-ries. Major authors may include Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron,  Keats, Percy Shelley, Mary Shelley, and Austen. Particular attention will  - 2021-2022.En 126. Gothic Fiction. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. The literature of  horror, fantasy, and the supernatural, from the late 18th century to the  present day. Particular attention will be paid to gothic™s shifting cultural   rationalism, to the contemporary ghost story as an instrument of social  gothic sense of space; gothic as a popular pathology; and the gender-ing of gothic narrative. Fiction by Walpole, Shelley, Brontë, Stoker, Poe,  Wilde, Angela Carter, and Toni Morrison. Film versions of the gothic may   587En 127. Jane Austen. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will fo-  Film and television adaptations will also be considered, and students     En 128. Modern and Contemporary Irish Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.  the early 20th-century Irish literary renaissance, through the impact of  modernism, to the Field Day movement and other contemporary devel -opments. Topics may include the impact of political violence and na -tional division upon the literary imagination; the use of folk and fairy-tale  English language and the relation of Irish writing to British literary tradi -tion; and recent treatments of Irish literature in regional, postcolonial,    En/VC 129. Literature/Photography/Facticity.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. ﬁIt is the picture of life contrasted with the fact of life, the ideal  contrasted with the real, which makes criticism possible,ﬂ insists  Frederick Douglass. This course will take an historical approach to the   Douglass refers to as the contrast between ﬁpictureﬂ and ﬁfactﬂ from the  advent of photography in the nineteenth century to our present moment.  Together, we will think about how each medium creates images, invites    the ways in which photography and literature shape our understanding    inform the ways of reading and ways of seeing we will develop in this  course. Readings may include Boucicault, Douglass, Dunbar, Hartmann,   En 131. Poe™s Afterlife.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course have had on other writers. Authors as diverse as Charles Baudelaire,  Jules Verne, Jorge Luis Borges, Vladimir Nabokov, John Barth, and  Philip Roth have used Poe™s stories as departure points for their own  work. We shall begin by reading some of Poe™s s classic short stories,  including ﬁThe Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym,ﬂ ﬁThe Purloined Letter,ﬂ   so important for authors, despite the fact that his reputation as a great    En 132. After Austen: Nineteenth-Century British Women's Writ -ing. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The Victorian period introduced a huge  array of new possibilities and constraints for women of all classes, English588conception of marriage and motherhood, and a new set of professional  restrictions but also opportunities. This class focuses on novels by and  about women, as it seeks to take the measure of these transformations  and of a larger culture's reaction to them. How did women imagine and  re-imagine themselves and what they wanted? How did notions of femi -ninity and masculinity change? How do the imaginings of the Victorians  resonate now? Authors studied may include Eliot, Gaskell, the Brontes,   En 134. The Career of Herman Melville.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.  ending with Billy Budd. Special attention will be given to Moby-Dick and Pierre. The centrality of Melville™s position in American literature  will be considered from a variety of perspectives, including aesthetics,  representations of race, class, and gender, the role of the audience, and   En/VC 135. Dickens™s London.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Charles Dickens and London have perhaps the most famous relationship of any  writer and city in English. In this course, we will investigate both the London Dickens knew, and the portrait of the city that he painted, by  reading one of Dickens™s great mid-career novels alongside a selection    idea of the novelist as alternative historian, and the idea of the novel   development of the Victorian police force; plague and public health;  Victorian poverty; colonialism and imperialism; Dickens and his illustra -  to be responsible for making a short research presentation at some   En 136. The Fiction of Charles Dickens. 9 units (3-0-6). An overview of     En 137. African American Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.   written by African Americans. This body of writing gives rise to two    American literary history? From slave narratives to Toni Morrison™s  Beloved, from the Harlem Renaissance to Alice Walker, from Ralph     589these cultural issues, but also in terms of their aesthetic and formal   En 138. Twain and His Contemporaries.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course will study the divergent theories of realism that arose in the  period after the Civil War and before World War I. Authors covered may  include Howells, James, Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Twain, Sarah Orne   2021-2022.En 140. Literature in the Marketplace of Books.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term.    and ask how our understanding of literature changes when books are  considered in terms of their physical characteristics and in relation to  the broader marketplace of which they were a part. Our inquiry will be    production of religious books during the Protestant Reformation; the  emergence of political pamphlets and newsbooks during the English   -mances, and novels. The course will include work with rare materials at  the Henry E. Huntington Library as well as an introduction to the digital   Koch.En 150. Chaos and Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. We tend to     onward draw upon ancient and contemporary concepts of chaos to  test out increasingly sophisticated models of disorder though writing.  Readings to include Lucretius, Serres, Calvino, Barth, Stoppard, and   En 151. Keeping Time. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The way in which humans perceive and record time has a discernable history, and literary  texts offer us one of the best ways to study it, particularly in times of war  and natural catastrophe. With a focus on 16th- through 18th-century European literature, we will examine various techniques of literary time-keeping as they relate to topics such as, fame and mortality, as   will include selections from Baroque emblem books as well as texts by Montaigne, Milton, Pepys, Defoe, and Rousseau. Instructor: Holland. Not offered 2021-2022. En/VC 160 ab. Classical Hollywood Cinema. term.  -ing during the classical period, from the coming of sound through the  English590‚50s. Students will develop the techniques and vocabulary appropri - collapse of the studio system, technical transformations (sound, color,   (the Depression, World War II, the Cold War), audience responses, and      En/VC 161. The New Hollywood. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This    broader social transformations and the development of new narrative  conventions and cinematic techniques. We will pay particular attention  Films covered may include  Bonnie and Clyde, The Graduate, The God-father, Taxi Driver , and Jaws En 164. Contemporary Black Diasporic Literature and Culture.  9 units  (3-0-6); second term. What is a Black diasporic analytic and how might  it deepen our understandings of the cultural, environmental, literary, and      -ences within and beyond English-speaking nations. While this course  focuses on contemporary Black diasporic literature and culture, it will  nevertheless foreground the various linguistic, literary, and national histories  that inform and shape this body of work. Additionally, students will learn  how recent Black diasporic literature and culture have in turn shaped our  current understandings of diaspora, family, gender, history, identity, labor,   -duce students to several pivotal Black diasporic literary and cultural works;  representative modes of criticism and methodologies in the disciplines of  diaspora studies; and the cultural, historical, and social realities of Black  lives from the 1980s to today. All readings will be provided in English.  In-   En 165. Black Feminist and Womanist Literature and Thought.  9 units  (3-0-6); second term. For centuries, Black feminists, especially queer   Caribbean, Europe, the United States, and more, have used literature to  reimagine feminisms. In the decades following the second-wave feminist  movement, a body of writing coalesced around the terms ﬁBlack femi -  Take Back the Night marches; the introduction of terms ﬁintersectionalityﬂ  by Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw and ﬁthird-wave feminismﬂ by Rebecca  Walker; the widespread publishing of works by feminists; the creation of  591Ethnic Studies and Women™s and Gender Studies departments across  institutions of higher education; and more. It was a moment in which Black  people across identities and national origins wrote a number of works   and more, in ways that challenged cultures of violence in favor of imagin -ing beloved communities. In this course, students will read, discuss, and  better understand multiple literary and critical works participating in Black     En 178. Medieval Subjectivities. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. In the sev- - goes. But long before the age of Descartes, the Middle Ages produced an  astonishing range of theories and ideas about human selfhood, subjectivity,  and interiority. For instance, writing from prison more than one thousand   being from all other creatures is his capacity to ﬁknow himself.ﬂ The mean -ing of this opaque statement and others like it will command our attention   highly sophisticated notions of subjectivity that developed in the literatures  of the Middle Ages. We will take up questions of human agency, free will,  identity, self-consciousness, confession, and secrecy as we encounter   among others) Augustine™s Confessions, Prudentius™s Psychomachia, the  Old English poem The Wanderer, the mystical writings of Margery Kempe   2021-2022.En 179. Constituting Citizenship before the Fourteenth Amendment.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. What can a slave™s narrative teach us about   seemed so silent on the matter? And how did one tailor™s pamphlet result  in one of most massive restrictions of free speech in U.S. history? Our  goal over the semester will be to sketch a story of African American literary  production from the latter half of the eighteenth century to the Civil War and   -ship in the United States. We will read letters, poems, sermons, songs,      deepen our understanding of the kinds of things people were reading and  writing on a regular basis and the kinds of arguments they were mak - Madison, Harriet Jacobs, Henry David Thoreau, Sojourner Truth, and David   En 180. Special Topics in English.   -ment.  English. It is usually taught by new or visiting faculty. The course may be  English592  visitors.En 181. Hardy: The Wessex Novels.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course     main novels will be read critically to give a sense of the totality of this great - En 182. Literature and the First Amendment.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.       culture has intersected with law and politics. We will investigate the ways  in which the meanings of ﬁfreedom,ﬂ what it entails, and who is entitled to  it have changed over time. Possible topics include the obscenity trials sur-rounding Allen Ginsberg™s Howl and James Joyce™s Ulysses, crackdowns  on anti-war propagandists, and the legal battle between Hustler publisher  Larry Flynt and televangelist and Moral Majority cofounder Jerry Falwell.   En 183. Victorian Crime Fiction.  In 19th-century   to live in urban areas than in rural ones. This result of the Industrial Revolu - striking was an obsession with the problem of crime. Victorian authors    history, publishing developments, and formal dilemmas that underlay such  a response. Authors studied may include Dickens, Collins, Braddon, Conan   En 185. Dickens and the Dickensian. 9 units (3-0-6). The adjective ﬁDickensianﬂ makes an almost daily appearance in today™s newspapers,   from outrageous political scandals, to Bollywood musicals, to multi -plot novels. But what does the word really mean? And what part of  Charles Dickens™s output does it refer to? This class will consider some  of Dickens™s most famous works alongside a series of contemporary  novels, all critically described in ﬁDickensianﬂ terms. The main concern  will be equally with style and form, and 19th-century and present-day   publication, etc.). Authors considered (aside from Dickens) may include   -fered 2021-2022. 593En 186. The Novel of Education. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This class takes up a set of mostly very funny, mostly 20th century British novels  to frame a simple-seeming, yet deceptively complicated set of ques--  a variety of university-centered topics (determined by student interest)  including issues of gender, class, privilege, race, and genius. Authors  read may include Sayers, Larkin, Amis, C.P. Snow, Lodge, and Zadie    En 190. Chaucer.  This course devotes itself  Chaucer. Best known for the Canterbury Tales, Chaucer also authored  dream visions, lyrics, and philosophical meditations. This course  will introduce you to some better-known and lesser-known works in   centuries. What did it mean to ﬁinventﬂ a literary work in late medieval England? How did Chaucer imagine himself as a writer and reader?  What are the hallmarks of Chaucerian style, and how did Chaucer  become the canonical author he is today? We will read Chaucer™s works  in their original language, Middle English, working slowly enough to give   En 191. Masterworks of Contemporary Latin American Fiction. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course studies Latin America™s most  stories and novellas produced by the region™s avant-garde and ﬁboomﬂ  generations. Authors may include Allende, Bombal, Borges, García    En/H 193. Cervantes, Truth or Dare: Don Quixote in an Age of Em -pire.  Studies Cervantes™s literary masterpiece,    demise and the rise of mass poverty; Reformation and Counter-Refor - - calls into question the boundaries between sanity and madness, truth What might be modern, perhaps even revolutionary, in Cervantes™s dra - En/H 197. American Literature and the Technologies of Reading.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.  English594American literature from the colonial era through the nineteenth century.   produced, and how these forms shaped and were shaped by readers™  engagement with them. Possible topics include the history of such printing technologies as presses, types, paper, ink, binding, and illustra -tion; the business of bookmaking and the development of the publishing industry; the rise of literary authorship; the career of Benjamin Franklin;  print, politics, and the American Revolution; and manuscript culture. Not   ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE  for requirements regarding English competency.  All of the following courses are open to international graduate students  only.  ESL 101 ab. Oral Communication and Presentation.  3 units (3-0-This course focuses on preparing non-native  speakers of English with the communication skills necessary to orga - variety of audiences. ESL 101a will provide instruction on the develop -ment of pronunciation, intonation patterns and stress, grammar and   of American culture as well as come current events will be discussed.  ESL 101b is a continuation of ESL 101a, and covers a variety of oral   and communicate ideas to the class. The class will discuss information from readings and other media sources in small groups to collect and   -ate students and may be required for some students designated by the  ESL interview process during Orientation. A passing grade will satisfy     6 units (3-0-3); third  term. This course provides guided instruction in academic writing in   - writers with academic STEM discourse, and it teaches writers about the style and genres of U.S. academic STEM writing, helping them learn to      is designed for non-native speakers of English, but it covers topics that  595ESL/Wr 108.  Intermediate Graduate Writing Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3); summer term. This course focuses on strategies for composing an  form of each section of the journal article will be considered in depth.  The course is intended for graduate students who are prepared to be a  lead author on a manuscript. While the course will cover strategies for collaborative writing, students will be asked to draft sections of an origi-nal journal article based upon their own research. The course will also  provide instruction on selecting a target journal, preparing a manuscript  for submission, and responding to feedback from peer reviewers. Clarity   This course is designed for non-native speakers of English, but it covers topics that are relevant to native English speakers. Course enrollment is  ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND  ENGINEERINGESE 1. Earth™s Climate.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  An introduction to  climate on Earth. How Earth™s climate has changed in the past and its   happening today. Model projections of future climate and associated  risks. Development of climate policies in face of uncertainty in these  -ment of the Caltech core curriculum. Juniors and Seniors who have   - FS/ESE/Ge 18. Freshman Seminar: The Unseen Microbial World in  Plain Sight.  For course description, see Fresh -man Seminars.ESE 90. Undergraduate Laboratory Research in Environmental Sci -ence and Engineering. Units by arrangement; any term. Approval of  research supervisor required prior to registration. Independent research    ESE 91. Senior Thesis Research. 9 units; third term.   Two terms of ESE 90 are to be  completed during the junior and/or senior year of study. At the end of the  third term, students enrolled in ESE 91 will present a thesis of approxi-the ESE Option Representative. The thesis must be approved by both  the research mentor and the ESE faculty. An oral thesis defense will  be arranged by the ESE Option Representative in the third term for all enrollees. All prior terms of ESE 90 will be taken on a pass/fail basis, but  the third term of ESE 91 will carry a letter grade. Instructor: Staff. Environmental Science and Engineering 596ESE 100. Special Problems in Environmental Science and Engineer -ing. Up to 12 units by arrangement; any term. Prerequisites: instruc -tor™s permission.  Special courses of readings or laboratory instruction.  ESE 101. Earth™s Atmosphere.  Introduc -tion to the fundamental processes governing atmospheric circulations  and climate. Starting from an overview of the observed state of the  atmosphere and its variation over the past, the course discusses Earth™s    atmospheric circulations in maintaining the energy, angular momentum,  and water balances, which determine the distributions of temperatures,  winds, and precipitation. The focus throughout is on order-of-magnitude  physics that is applicable to climates generally, including those of   ESE 102.    This course will provide a basic introduction to physical, chemical, and biological proper- various aspects of the marine carbon cycle, including carbon and tracer  respiration of carbon by biological processes. The focus of the course is  on understanding the processes that give rise to observed distributions of physical and biogeochemical properties in the ocean. We will also dis - sensing techniques for monitoring changing ocean properties. Instructor: Thompson.ESE 103.   9 units (3-0-6); second term. provide a basic introduction to Global Biogeochemical cycles, with a focus on drivers of the global biosphereFor course description, see Computer Science.. Topics to be covered include fundamentals  of photosynthesis and its quantitative formulation, impact of nutrients, microbial processes underlying weathering, decomposition, and carbon remineralization, box modeling, hydrological cycle, land surface energy balance and basics of land surface modeling, ecosystem processes and the human footprint. Scripting (Matlab) knowledge useful for homework sets. Instructor: Staff. ESE 104. Current Problems in Environmental Science and Engineer -ing. Discussion of current research by ESE graduate   Bi/Ge/ESE 105. Evolution. 12 units (3-4-5); second term. For course description, see Biology. ESE 106. Research in Environmental Science and Engineering.  Units by arrangement; any term. Prerequisites: instructor™s permission.    597ESE 110 abc.  Seminar in Environmental Science and Engineering.  -ate students at the weekly ESE seminar, Wednesdays 4pm. Graded  pass/fail. Instructor: Callies.ChE/ESE/ME/MS 111. Sustainable Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6). Four course description, see Chemical Engineering.Ge/ESE 118. Methods in Data Analysis.  -requisites: Ma 1 or equivalent.  For course description, see Geology. BEM/Ec/ESE 119. Environmental Economics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Business, Economics, and Management.ESE 130. Introduction to Atmosphere and Ocean Dynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.   This course is an introduction to Starting from the equations of motion, we will develop an understanding of geostrophic and hydrostatic balance, inertia-gravity waves, geostroph-ic adjustment, potential vorticity, quasi-geostrophic dynamics, Rossby  waves, baroclinic instability, and Ekman layers.  Instructor: Callies.ESE 131. Ocean Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.    This course gives an on the concepts developed in ESE 130, this course explores the vertical structure of the wind-driven gyre circulation, thermocline theory, the dy -namics of the Southern Ocean, eddies and eddy parameterizations, geo-strophic turbulence, submesoscale dynamics, the circulation of the deep ocean, tides, internal waves, and turbulent mixing. Instructor: Callies.ESE 132. Tropical Atmosphere Dynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); third  -sion. Phenomenological description of tropical atmospheric circulations at different scales, and theories or models that capture the underlying  fundamental dynamics, starting from the large-scale energy balance and moving down to cumulus convection and hurricanes. Topics to be ad -dressed include: large-scale circulations such as the Hadley, Walker, and  monsoonal circulations, the intertropical convergence zone, equatorial waves, convectively coupled waves, and hurricanes. Instructor: Schnei-der.   ESE 133. Global Atmospheric Circulations.  9 units (3-0-6); second  -sion.beginning with a phenomenological overview of observed circulations on Earth and other planets and leading to currently unsolved problems. Top -ics include constraints on atmospheric circulations and zonal winds from angular momentum balance; Rossby wave generation, propagation, Environmental Science and Engineering 598and dissipation and their roles in the maintenance of global circulations; Hadley circulations and tropical-extratropical interactions; energy cycle   planetary circulations and relationships among them as parameters such as the planetary rotation rate chance.  Not offered  2021-2022. ESE 134. Cloud and Boundary Layer Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.   Introduction to the dynamics controlling boundary layers and clouds and how they may change with climate, from a phenomenological overview of cloud and boundary layer morphologies to closure theories for turbulence and convection. Topics include similarity theories for boundary layers; mixed- layer models; moist thermodynamics and stability; stratocumulus and trade-cumulus boundary layers; shallow cumulus convection and deep convection. Instructor: Schneider. ESE 135. Topics in Atmosphere and Ocean Dynamics.   -A lecture and discussion course on current research  in atmosphere and ocean dynamics. Topics covered vary from year to  year and may include global circulations of planetary atmospheres, geo-strophic turbulence, atmospheric convection and cloud dynamics, wave dynamics and large-scale circulations in the tropics, marine physical-biogeochemical interactions, and dynamics of the El Niño Southern Oscillation. Instructor: Callies.  ESE 136. Climate Models.   Introduction to climate models, from numerical methods for the underlying equations of motion to parameterization schemes for processes such as clouds, sea ice, and land hydrology. The course will move from an overview of modeling con -cepts to the practice of climate modeling, with hands-on exercises in run-ning a climate model and analyzing and understanding its output. It will enable students to design their own model experiments and to evaluate modeling results critically. Instructor: Schneider.   ESE 137. Polar Oceanography.  -  This course focuses on high  -tion with the cryosphere, including glaciers, ice shelves and sea ice. The  course starts with introductory lectures related to regional circulation  of the course will focus on a single topic, with input from the students, individual projects.  Instructor: Thompson.  Given in alternate years; of -fered 2021-2022. ESE 138. Ocean Turbulence and Wave Dynamics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: ESE 131 or instructor™s permission.  Introduc -599these processes feedback on large-scale ocean circulation and climate.   topographic Rossby waves, inertia-gravity waves, mesoscale eddies, -will also include a discussion of observational techniques for measuring mesoscale and small-scale processes in the ocean.   Ge/ESE 139. Introduction to Atmospheric Radiation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description in Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ge/ESE 140 c. Stable Isotope Biogeochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.ESE/Ge 142. Aquatic Chemistry of Natural Waters.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ch 1 or instructor™s permission.  Inorganic  chemistry of natural waters with an emphasis on equilibrium solutions to problems in rivers, lakes, and the ocean. Topics will include, acid-base    geobiology. Selected topics in kinetics will be covered based on interest  Ge/ESE 143. Organic Geochemistry.  9 units (3-2-4). For course de-scription, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.ESE 144. Climate from Space. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Introduction to the climate system. Introduction to radiative transfer, retrieval methods   composition. Ocean dynamics and ice physics from space. The carbon  cycle from space. Climate monitoring. Instructors: Teixeira, Staff. ME/CE/Ge/ESE 146. Computational Methods for Flow in Porous  Media. 9 units (3-0-6); second. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ge/Bi/BE/CNS/ESE 147. Challenges and Opportunities in Quantita-tive Ecology.  3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ge/ESE 149. Marine Geochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ge/ESE 150. Planetary Atmospheres.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ge/ESE 154. Readings in Paleoclimate. 3 units (1-0-2). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Environmental Science and Engineering 600Ge/ESE 155. Paleoceanography.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. ESE 156. Remote Sensing of the Atmosphere and Biosphere.  9    -sion. An introduction into methods to quantify trace gases as well as vegetation properties remotely (from space, air-borne or ground-based). This course will provide the basic concepts of remote sensing, using hands-on examples to be solved in class and as problem-sets. Topics  covered include Absorption spectroscopy, measurement and model -ing techniques, optimal estimation theory and error characterization, applications in global studies of biogeochemical cycles and air pollution/quality. This course is complementary to EE/Ae 157ab and Ge/EE/ESE  157c with stronger emphasis on applications for the atmosphere and biosphere. Students will work with real and synthetic remote sensing data (basic knowledge of a scripting language is advantageous, most of the examples will be in Julia). Instructor: Frankenberg.  2021-2022.Ge/EE/ESE 157 c. Remote Sensing for Environmental and Geologi -cal Applications. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.ESE/ChE 158. Aerosol Physics and Chemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term; Open to graduate students and seniors with instructor™s permis -sion. Fundamentals of aerosol physics and chemistry; aerodynamics   -modynamics of particulate systems; nucleation; coagulation; particle  ESE/Bi 166. Microbial Physiology.  -mended prerequisite: one year of general biology.  A course on growth      ESE/Bi 168. Microbial Metabolic Diversity.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ESE 142, ESE/Bi 166.  A course on the metabolic diversity of microorganisms. Basic thermodynamic principles govern -ing energy conservation will be discussed, with emphasis placed on   genomic, and biochemical techniques that can be used to elucidate the mechanisms of cellular electron transfer underlying these metabolisms.   ESE/Ge/Ch 171. Atmospheric Chemistry I. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A detailed course about chemi - thermodynamics of gas-phase chemistry of the stratosphere and 601troposphere; sources, sinks, and lifetimes of trace atmospheric species; stratospheric ozone chemistry; oxidation mechanisms in the tropo-sphere; aerosol chemistry.  Instructors: Seinfeld, Wennberg. ESE/Ge/Ch 172. Atmospheric Chemistry II. Prerequisite: ESE/Ge/Ch 171 or equivalent.  A lecture and discussion  course about active research in atmospheric chemistry. Potential topics  include halogen chemistry of the stratosphere and troposphere; aerosol  formation in remote environments; coupling of dynamics and photo -chemistry; development and use of modern remote-sensing and in situ     ESE/Ch 176. Environmental Physical Organic Chemistry Part I.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 41ab or instructor™s permis -sion. This course will cover selected aspects of the chemistry of aquatic systems. Lectures cover basic principles of physical-organic chemistry  relevant to the aquatic environment under realistic conditions. Spe - chemical and physical processes important natural waters. Topics in - metal-ligand substitution chemistry, surface chemistry, octanol-water  partitioning, air-water partitioning, partitioning to solid organic matter    reactions. Thermodynamics, transport, phase transfer and kinetics are  ESE/Ch 177. Environmental Physical Organic Chemistry Part II.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: ESE/Ch 176 or instructor™s  permission. This course will cover selected aspects of the organic  chemistry of aquatic systems and coupled air-water systems. Topics  include photochemical transformations, biochemical transformations in sub-surface water, surface water, and sediments, heterogeneous  surface reactions and catalysis, hydrolysis reactions, nucleophilic dis - acid ester hydrolysis, thiophosphoric acid ester hydrolysis, carbamate  ester hydrolysis, and amide ester hydrolysis. The primary goal is to  better understand factors controlling the fate and behavior of organic  compounds and persistent organic pollutants in the global environment.   Ge/ESE/Bi 178. Microbial Ecology.  . For course descrip-tion, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.ESE/ME/EST/Ec/ChE/EE 179. Climate Change Impacts, Mitiga-tion and Adaptation. 3 units (3-0-0); second term. Climate change has already begun to impact life on the planet, and will continue in the   of climate change, technologies to mitigate or adapt to those impacts, and the economic and social costs associated with them - particular Environmental Science and Engineering 602focus will be paid to distributional issues, environmental and racial  -ity or transportation sector, climate impacts of food and agriculture,    - - ESE 200. Advanced Topics in Environmental Science and Engineer -ing. Units by arrangement; any term. Course on contemporary topics in environmental science and engineering. Topics covered vary from year   Ge/Bi/ESE 246. Molecular Geobiology Seminar.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences. Ge/ESE/Bi 248. Environmental Justice.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.Ge/ESE 298. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year.  For course description, see Geological and Planetary Sciences.ESE 300. Thesis Research.  Thesis re-search for graduate students after passing the qualifying exam. Graded pass/fail. Instructor: Staff. For other closely related courses, see listings under Chemistry,  Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Biology, Geological and Planetary Sciences, Economics, and Social  Science.FILM(For course descriptions, please see Visual Culture   FRESHMAN SEMINARS Intelligence. 6 units (2-0-4); second term. What is life? What is special about the human brain? How did the invention of writing enable the   (DNA) that is enriched by an innovation process (mutation and selection)  that leads to new species. Also, we will argue that the human brain is an  information system that has memory (enabled by natural languages) that 603is enriched by an innovation process (learning) that leads to new ideas.  The emergence of life and the human brain served as the backdrop to   Bruck. FS/Ay 3. Freshman Seminar: Automating Discovering the Universe.  6 units (2-0-4); third term.  Powerful new instruments enable astrono -mers to collect huge volumes of data on billions of objects. As a result,   astronomers will probably be analysing data collected in large surveys,  and only a few will still be visiting observatories to collect their own data. The tool chest of future astronomers will involve facility with ﬁbig  dataﬂ, developing clever queries, algorithms (some based on machine learning) and statistics, and combining multiple databases. This course  will introduce students to some of these tools. After ﬁrecoveringﬂ known  objects, students will be unleashed to make their own astronomical   FS/Ph 4. Freshman Seminar: Astrophysics and Cosmology with  Open Data. Astrophysics and cosmology are  in the midst of a golden age of science-rich observations from incredibly  powerful telescopes of various kinds. The data from these instruments  are often freely available on the web. Anyone can do things like study   using data from Swift and Fermi; discover planets eclipsing nearby stars   supernovae data; study the cosmic microwave background with data      FS/EE 5. Introduction to Waves.  This course is an intuitive introduction to waves. Have you ever wanted to break a  wineglass with sound? Or make your own hologram? Or stand under a   types of wave phenomena mathematically and then see them in action  FS/Ph 9. Freshman Seminar: The Science of Music.  6 units (2-0-4); This course will focus on the physics of sound, how musical instruments make it, and how we hear it, including readings, discus -sions, demonstrations, and student observations using sound analysis  other sounds, and its role psychically and culturally. Students will do   book review, analysis of recordings of actual musical instruments, or in -Freshman Seminars 604strument construction and analysis. Freshmen only; limited enrollment.   FS/Ph 11 abc. Freshman Seminar: Beyond Physics.  6 units (2-0-4);   -ting potential solutions to problems posed in the fall term. A small  number of solutions will be selected as winners, granting those students permission to register. This course demonstrates how research ideas  arise, are evaluated, and tested and how the ideas that survive are de -veloped. Weekly group discussions and one-on-one meetings with fac - from physics are used to think about a huge swath of problems ranging    Caltech between freshman and sophomore years will be automatic for    FS/Ma 12. Freshman Seminar: The Mathematics of Enzyme Kinet -ics. 6 units (2-0-4); third term. Prerequisites: Ma 1a, b.   the heart of biochemistry. We will begin with a down to earth discussion  of how, as catalysts, they are used to convert substrate to product.   - non-linear. However, under a steady state hypothesis, they reduce to a  simpler equation, whose solution can describe the late time behavior.    FS/Ge 16. Freshman Seminar: Earthquakes.  Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions constitute some of the world™s ma - response to these events? We will review the current understanding of  forecasting, and real-time response to these events. We will learn  about advances in earthquake preparation in Southern California, and     FS 17. Freshman Seminar: The Business Side of Sports.  6 units (2-0-4); second term.  success of the low-budget Oakland A™s in competing against teams with   of this course is to evaluate the central claims of the Moneyball thesis. Students will read Moneyball, many of the classic essays published by  Bill James in the Baseball Abstract, and some of the classic works in decision theory. The course will necessarily focus on the way baseball  605- FS/ESE/Ge 18. Freshman Seminar: The Unseen Microbial World  in Plain Sight. To paraphrase a Caltech   fascinating, until recently our species had been nothing more than the  hood ornament on a really interesting car. We should be studying what™s  under the hood, the microbial world, if we want to understand the    of microbial interest somewhere in southern California. Freshmen only;    FS/Ec 19. Freshman Seminar: Thinking like an Economist.  6 units Economics is a way of analyzing the world in which scarcity requires tradeoffs and creates constraints which are expressed  as mathematical optimization. Theories are tested with both controlled  intuitionﬂ). We will develop economic intuition about topics which include:  Unintended consequences, how to show causality, partial and gen -eral equilibrium, game theory, the effect of institutional systems, price  bubbles, pricing risk, drug addiction, and more. Freshmen only, limited  enrollment. Instructor: Camerer. GEOLOGICAL AND PLANETARY SCIENCES Geology, Geobiology, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Planetary Science Ge 1. Earth and Environment.  9 units (3-3-3); third term.  An introduc -tion to the ideas and approaches of earth and planetary sciences,  including both the special challenges and viewpoints of these kinds of science as well as the ways in which basic physics, chemistry, and  biology relate to them. In addition to a wide-ranging lecture-oriented   and topics cover such issues as solid Earth structure and evolution,  plate tectonics, oceans and atmospheres, climate change, and the    the Caltech core curriculum. Ge 10. Frontiers in Geological and Planetary Sciences.  2 units (2-0-0); second term. The course may be taken multiple times. Weekly  seminar by a member of the Division of Geological and Planetary Sci-ences or a visitor to discuss a topic of his or her current research at  an introductory level. The course is designed to introduce students to  research and research opportunities in the division and to help students   Geological and Planetary Sciences606Ge 11 a. Introduction to Earth and Planetary Sciences: Earth as a  Planet. Systematic introduction to the physi -cal and chemical processes that have shaped Earth as a planet over  geological time, and the observable products of these processesŠrock  materials, minerals, land forms. Geophysics of Earth. Plate tectonics; earthquakes; igneous activity. Metamorphism and metamorphic rocks.  Rock deformation and mountain building. Weathering, erosion, and  sedimentary rocks. The causes and recent history of climate change.    -terpretation of topographic and geological maps. Although Ge 11 abcd  is designed as a sequence, any one term may be taken as a standalone  Ge 11 b. Introduction to Earth and Planetary Sciences: Earth and  the Biosphere.  9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisite: Ch 1 a.  Sys-tematic introduction to the origin and evolution of life and its impact on  the oceans, atmosphere, and climate of Earth. Topics covered include   Microbial and molecular evolution, photosynthesis, genes as fossils.  Banded iron stones, microbial mats, stromatolites, and global glaciation.  Biological fractionation of stable isotopes. Numerical calibration of the laboratory studies of rocks, fossils, and geological processes. Although  Ge 11 abcd is designed as a sequence, any one term may be taken as  Fischer, Kirschvink.  Ge/Ay 11 c. Introduction to Earth and Planetary Sciences: Planetary  Sciences. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ma 1 ab, Ph 1 ab.  A broad introduction to the present state and early history of the solar  system, including terrestrial planets, giant planets, moons, asteroids,  comets, and rings. Earth-based observations, observations by planetary are used to constrain models of the dynamical and chemical processes  of planetary systems. Although Ge 11 abcd is designed as a sequence, any one term may be taken as a standalone course. Physicists and  Ge 11 d. Introduction to Earth and Planetary Sciences: Geophys -ics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ch 1, Ma 2 a, Ph 2 a.  An introduction to the geophysics of the solid earth; formation of planets;  structure and composition of Earth; interactions between crust, mantle,  and core; surface and internal dynamics; mantle convection; imaging of  the interior; seismic tomography. Although Ge 11 abcd is designed as a  sequence, any one term can be taken as a standalone course. Instruc- FS/Ge 16. Freshman Seminar: Earthquakes.  For course description, see Freshman Seminars. 607FS/ESE/Ge 18. Freshman Seminar: The Unseen Microbial World in  Plain Sight.  For course description, see Fresh -man Seminars.Ge 40. Special Problems for Undergraduates.  Units to be arranged; any term. This course provides a mechanism for undergraduates to  undertake honors-type work in the geologic sciences. By arrangement Ge 41 abc. Undergraduate Research and Bachelor™s Thesis.  Units  Guidance in seeking research  opportunities and in formulating a research plan leading to preparation  of a bachelor™s thesis is available from the GPS option representatives.  Ge 101. Introduction to Geology and Geochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6);  A broad, high-level survey of geology and geochemistry with emphasis  on quantitative understanding. Historical deduction in the geological and planetary sciences. Plate tectonics as a unifying theory of geology.  Igneous and metamorphic processes, structural geology and geomor -phology; weathering and sedimentary processes. Nucleosynthesis and  chemical history of the solar system; distribution of the elements in the earth; isotopic systems as tracers and clocks; evolution of the bio-sphere; global geochemical and biogeochemical cycles; geochemical    Ge 102. Introduction to Geophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ph 2, or Ge 108, or equivalents.  An introduction to  the physics of the earth. The present internal structure and dynamics of  the earth are considered in light of constraints from the gravitational and   of wave propagation in earth materials are developed and applied to  inferring Earth structure. The earthquake source is described in terms    mechanism data have made to our understanding of plate tectonics, the driving mechanism of plate tectonics, and the energy sources of mantle   Ge 103. Introduction to the Solar System.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  Formation and evolution of the solar system. Interiors, surfaces, and atmospheres. Orbital dynamics,   Ge 104. Introduction to Geobiology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  Lectures about the interaction  and coevolution of life and Earth surface environments. We will cover  -Geological and Planetary Sciences608biology, and introduce common approaches to solving these problems.  Topics will include biological fractionation of stable isotopes; history and  -data; constructing simple mathematical models constrained by isotope mass balance; working with public databases of genetic information;  Fischer, Kirschvink. Bi/Ge/ESE 105. Evolution. 12 units (3-4-5); second term. For course description, see Biology. Ge 106. Introduction to Structural Geology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ge 11 ab.  Description and origin of main classes of deformational structures. Introduction to continuum mechanics and its  application to rock deformation. Interpretation of the record of deforma -tion of the earth™s crust and upper mantle on microscopic, mesoscopic,  and megascopic scales. Introduction to the tectonics of mountain belts.   Ay/Ge 107.  Introduction to Astronomical Observation.  9 units (1-1-For course description, see Astrophysics. Ge 108. Applications of Physics to the Earth Sciences. 9 units (3-0- An intermedi-ate course in the application of the basic principles of classical physics  -ing bodies, the two-body problem, tidal theory, oscillations and normal     Ge 109. Oral Presentation.  Units to be arranged. - before groups. Units and scheduling are done by the individual options.  Ge 111 ab. Applied Geophysics Seminar and Field Course. 6 units (3-3-0); second, third terms. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission. 9 units  (0-3-6); spring break, third term. Prerequisite: Ge 111 a.  An introduc - a variety of methods (e.g., gravity, magnetic, electrical, GPS, seismic  studies, and satellite remote sensing). The course will consist of a   area, along with the theoretical basis and implementation of the various   spring break, and the data analysis component is covered in Ge 111 b.   Clayton, Simons. 609Ge 112. Sedimentology and Stratigraphy.  12 units (3-5-4); third term.  Prerequisite: Ge 11 ab.  Systematic analysis of transport and deposition  and structure of both clastic and chemical sedimentary rocks. The  nature and genesis of sequence architecture of sedimentary basins and  cyclic aspects of sedimentary accumulation will be introduced. Covers  correlation, and the construction of a geologic timescale. Field trip and    Ge 114 a. Mineralogy.  Atomic structure, com -position, physical properties, occurrence, and identifying characteristics  of the major mineral groups. The laboratory work involves the character --Ge 114 b. Mineralogy Laboratory.   -uisite: concurrent enrollment in Ge 114 a or instructor™s permission.  Additional laboratory studies of optical crystallography, the use of the    Ge 115 a. Petrology and Petrography: Igneous Petrology.  9 units (3-3-3); second term. Prerequisites: Ge 114 ab.  Study of the origin, oc- -phasis on use of phase equilibria and geochemistry.     Ge 115 b. Petrology and Petrography: Metamorphic Petrology.  9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisites: Ge 114 ab.  The mineralogic and  rocks; interpretation of mineral assemblages in the light of chemical  of metamorphic assemblages to understand tectonic, petrologic, and  geochemical problems associated with convergent plate boundaries  and intrusion of magmas into the continental crust. May be taken before   Given in alternate years; o  Ge 115 c. Petrography Laboratory.  6 units (0-4-2); third term.  Prereq-uisites: Ge 114 and either Ge 115 a or Ge 115 b.  Laboratory exercises  dealing with examination of igneous and metamorphic rocks and minerals  in hand-sample and with the petrographic microscope and other mineral   Ge 116. Analytical Techniques Laboratory.  9 units (1-4-4); second term. Prerequisites: Ge 114 a or instructor™s permission.  Methods of  --ules covering scanning electron microscopy (imaging, energy-dispersive   Geological and Planetary Sciences610  source mass spectrometry for elemental and radiogenic isotope analy -  Ge/Ay 117. Bayesian Statistics and Data Analysis.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: CS1 or equivalent.   -etary science and astronomy, vast quantities of data are often available  to researchers. The challenge is converting this information into mean -ingful knowledge about the universe. The primary focus of this course is the development of a broad and general tool set that can be applied to  the student™s own research. We will use case studies from the astro -physical and planetary science literature as our guide as we learn about   to select the best model for the task at hand, and learn the importance   Ge/ESE 118. Methods in Data Analysis.  -requisites: Ma 1 or equivalent.  Introduction to methods in data analysis.    include linear regression, least squares inversion, Fourier analysis,  principal component analysis, and Bayesian methods. Emphasis will be on both a theoretical understanding of these methods and on practical    Ge 119. Geology of the American Southwest. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. This course is a lecture-based course on the geologic history of the   Nevada, Utah, and Colorado, as well as, Arizona, New Mexico). Lectures  will cover the geologic history in chronologic order and will highlight the   region. Instructor: Bucholz. offered 2021-2022. Ge 120 a. Field Geology: Introduction to Field Geology.  9 units (1-6-2); third term. Prerequisites: Ge 11 ab, Ge 106 (may be taken  concurrently with Ge 106).  A comprehensive introduction to methods of   - analysis of geologic maps. Field trips introduce methods of geological  Ge 120 b. Field Geology: Summer Field Camp. 15 units (0-15-0); sum-mer. Prerequisites: Ge 120 a or instructor™s permission.  Intensive three-  and report preparation. Field work begins in mid-June after Commence - 611Ge 121 abc. Advanced Field Geology.  third terms. Prerequisites: Ge 120 or equivalent, or instructor™s permis -sion. Field mapping and supporting laboratory studies in topical prob -lems related to the geology of the southwestern United States. Course   -tary rocks or geomorphology. Multiple terms of 121 may be taken more    Ge 122 abc. Field Geology Seminar.   terms. Prerequisites: Ge 11ab or Ge 101, or instructor™s permission.     -  Ge 123. Continental Crust Seminar.  3 units (1-0-2); second term. A seminar course focusing on a topic related to the continental crust,  which will be decided depending on the interest of participating  students. Potential topics include arc magmatism, the evolution of the  composition of continental crust through time, formation of granites, or   -nental crust generation. The course will comprise weekly student-lead  Ge 124 a. Paleomagnetism and Magnetostratigraphy.  6 units (0-0-6); third term.  Application of paleomagnetism to the solution of problems in  stratigraphic correlation and to the construction of a high-precision geo - 2021-2022.Ge 124 b. Paleomagnetism and Magnetostratigraphy.  9 units (3-3-3); third term. Prerequisite: Ge 11 ab.  The principles of rock magnetism and  physical stratigraphy; emphasis on the detailed application of paleo-magnetic techniques to the determination of the history of the geomag- 2021-2022.Ge 125. Geomorphology.   11 a or instructor™s permission.   -  are designed to facilitate quantitative measurements and analyses of    Geological and Planetary Sciences612Ge 126. Topics in Earth Surface Processes.  6 units (2-0-4); sec-ond term.  geomorphology and sedimentology depending on student interest. Po -tential themes could include river response to climate change, bedrock  erosion in tectonically active mountain belts, or delta evolution on Earth  and Mars. The course will consist of student-led discussions centered   Ge/Ch 127. Nuclear Chemistry.   instructor™s permission.  A survey course in the properties of nuclei, and  in atomic phenomena associated with nuclear-particle detection. Topics  include rates of production and decay of radioactive nuclei; interaction  of radiation with matter; nuclear masses, shapes, spins, and moments;   Ge/Ch 128. Cosmochemistry.   instructor™s permission. medium, of protostellar nebulae, and of primitive solar-system objects  with a view toward establishing the relationship of the chemical evolu -aggregates in the early solar system that may contribute to habitability.  Emphasis will be placed on identifying the physical conditions in vari-ous objects, timescales for physical and chemical change, chemical processes leading to change, observational constraints, and various  models that attempt to describe the chemical state and history of cosmological objects in general and the early solar system in particular.   Ge 131. Planetary Structure and Evolution.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  A critical assessment of the physi- -tion, and current state of planets, including our planet and planetary sat -ellites. Topics to be covered include a short survey of condensed-matter  physics as it applies to planetary interiors, remote sensing of planetary  interiors, planetary modeling, core formation, physics of ongoing dif -ferentiation, the role of mantle convection in thermal evolution, and  Ge/Ay 132. Atomic and Molecular Processes in Astronomy and  Planetary Sciences.  permission. Fundamental aspects of atomic and molecular spectra that enable one to infer physical conditions in astronomical, planetary, and  terrestrial environments. Topics will include the structure and spectra of   and recombination; collisional processes; gas-phase chemical reac -tions; and isotopic fractionation. Each topic will be illustrated with ap-plications in astronomy and planetary sciences, ranging from planetary  atmospheres and dense interstellar clouds to the early universe. Instruc - 613Ge/Ay 133. The Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems.  9 Review current theoretical ideas and observa -tions pertaining to the formation and evolution of planetary systems. Topics to be covered include low-mass star formation, the protoplan -etary disk, accretion and condensation in the solar nebula, the forma -tion of gas giants, meteorites, the outer solar system, giant impacts, Ge 136 abc. Regional Field Geology of the Southwestern United  States.  Prerequisite: Ge 11 ab or Ge 101, or instructor™s permission.  Includes  highly varied geology. Each student is assigned the major responsibility   Ge/Ay 137. Planetary Physics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Ph 106 abc, ACM 95/100 ab. A quantitative review of dynamical   An understanding of orbit-orbit resonances, spin-orbit resonances,  be developed within the framework of Hamiltonian perturbation theory.    Ge/ESE 139. Introduction to Atmospheric Radiation.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ph 2, or instructor™s permis -sion. The basic physics of absorption and scattering of light by mol-ecules, aerosols, and clouds. Theory of radiative transfer. Band models,   -tion, thermal emission, heating rates and radiances. Applications to   Ge 140 a. Stable Isotope Geochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. An introduction to the principles and applications of stable isotope sys --cal processes responsible for isotopic fractionation, and their underlying  chemical-physics principles. Topics include the kinetic theory of gases  and related isotopic fractionations, relevant subjects in quantum me -chanics and statistical thermodynamics, equations of motion of charged  -etry), the photochemistry of isotopic species, and applications to the   Ge 140 b. Radiogenic Isotope Geochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. An introduction to the principles and applications of radiogenic  isotope systems in earth science, with emphasis on the applications of these systems, from dating to forensic. Topics to be covered include nu -cleosynthesis, radioactive decay phenomena, geochronology, geochro -nometry, isotopes as tracers of solar system and planetary evolution,  Geological and Planetary Sciences614  2021-2022.Ge/ESE 140 c. Stable Isotope Biogeochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ge 140a or equivalent.  An introduction to the use of  stable isotopes in biogeochemistry, intended to give interested students  the necessary background to understand applications in a variety of   Ancient Earth. Topics include the principles of isotope distribution in   metabolism and biosynthesis; characteristic fractionations accompany-ing carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycling; and applications of stable iso - Ge 141. Isotope Cosmochemistry.   -sites: Instructor™s permission.  An introduction to the study of the origin, abundances and distribution of the elements and their isotopes in the Universe, with emphasis on the isotopic constraints into the condi-tions, events and processes that shaped our Solar System. Topics to  be covered include: cosmology and the age of the Universe, the age of the Milky Way and the duration of nucleosynthesis, the fundamentals  of isotopic fractionations, the key roles of isotopic anomalies in under-standing Solar System dynamics, early Solar System chronology from short- and long-lived nuclei, chondritic meteorite components as clues to solar nebula and asteroid evolution, as well as planetary formation and chronology (e.g., Moon, Mars, Earth). Instructor: Tissot. Not offered  2021-2022.ESE/Ge 142. Aquatic Chemistry of Natural Waters.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Environmental Science and  Engineering.Ge/ESE 143. Organic Geochemistry.  9 units (3-2-4); third term.  Prerequisite: Ch 41 a or equivalent.  Main topics include the analysis, properties, sources, and cycling of natural organic materials in the  environment, from their production in living organisms to burial and de - topics include analytical methods for organic geochemistry, lipid struc -ture and biochemistry, composition of organic matter, factors controlling   catagenesis, and biomarkers for ancient life. A laboratory component   -  Ge 145. Isotope-Ratio Mass Spectrometry.  This class provides a hands-on introduction to the construction and  operating principles of instrumentation used for isotope-ratio mass  615- Laboratories involve hands-on deconstruction and re-assembly of a   to 6 students at the discretion of the instructor, with preference given to  graduate students using this instrumentation in their research. Instruc - ME/CE/Ge/ESE 146. Computational Methods for Flow in Porous  Media. 9 units (3-0-6); second. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ge/Bi/BE/CNS/ESE 147. Challenges and Opportunities in Quantita-tive Ecology.  3 units (3-0-0); third term.  Ecosys--isms, the communities they constitute, and the physical and chemical conditions and processes occurring in the environment. These dynamics  are complex and multiscale across both length and time. This course  will explore quantitative approaches that observe, measure, model, and monitor ecosystems and the services that they provide society-and the emerging opportunities that could employ these approaches to improve and strengthen global sustainability when it comes to our own ecology.  This course will feature lectures each week from different members  of the Caltech faculty working on ecological problems from different  angles in order to illustrate how fresh insights can emerge by drawing on diverse ways-of-knowing. Instructor: Fischer (and a rotating cast of Caltech faculty).Ge/ESE 149. Marine Geochemistry.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ESE 102.  Introduction to chemical oceanography and  sediment geochemistry. We will address the question ﬁWhy is the ocean   trace element distributions of seawater and ocean sediments. Topics      Ge/ESE 150. Planetary Atmospheres.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. - A broad survey of the  formation, evolution, and present-day properties of planetary atmo-spheres, drawing examples from both the solar system and extrasolar planet literature. We will cover topics including energy balance, radiative  transfer, chemistry, cloud formation, dynamics, and escape. The goal of  this class is to provide an overview of key concepts relevant to planetary atmospheres that can serve as a foundation for future coursework or research in this area. Instructor: Knutson.Ge 151. Planetary Surfaces. 9 units (3-3-3); third term.  We will review  surfaces of solar system bodies, studying both composition and physi-Geological and Planetary Sciences616cal processes. Topics include exogenous processes (impact cratering,  space weathering) and endogenous processes (tectonic, volcanic, de Kleer. Ge/ESE 154. Readings in Paleoclimate. 3 units (1-0-2); second term. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  Lectures and readings in areas   Adkins. Ge/ESE 155. Paleoceanography.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Pre -requisites: ESE 102.  Evaluation of the data and models that make up our current understanding of past climates. Emphasis will be placed on  a historical introduction to the study of the past ten thousand to a few  hundred thousand years, with some consideration of longer timescales.  Evidence from marine and terrestrial sediments, ice cores, corals, and  speleothems will be used to address the mechanisms behind natural  climate variability. Models of this variability will be evaluated in light of  the data. Topics will include sea level and ice volume, surface tempera -ture evolution, atmospheric composition, deep ocean circulation, tropi -  Ge 156. Topics in Planetary Surfaces.  6 units (3-0-3).  announcement only. Reading about and discussion of current under -standing of the surface of a selected terrestrial planet, major satellite,  or asteroid. Important ﬁclassicﬂ papers will be reviewed, relative to the  data that are being returned from recent and current missions. May be  repeated for credit.  Ge/EE/ESE 157 c. Remote Sensing for Environmental and Geologi -cal Applications. 9 units (3-3-3); third term.  Analysis of electromagnetic  radiation at visible, infrared, and radio wavelengths for interpretation of  the physical and chemical characteristics of the surfaces of Earth and  of minerals and vegetation, atmospheric removal, image analysis, clas - is complementary to EE 157ab with emphasis on applications for geo-logical and environmental problems, using data acquired from airborne  and orbiting remote sensing platforms. Students will work with digital   Ge/Ay 159.  Astrobiology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. We approach  the age-old questions ﬁWhy are we here?ﬂ and ﬁAre we alone?ﬂ by cov -ering topics in cosmology, the origins of life, planetary habitability, the     -sis; the search for ancient habitable environments on Mars; icy satellites  617like Europa, Enceladus, and Titan as astrobiological prospects; and the   -fered 2021-2022. Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab. Continuum Mechanics of Fluids and Solids. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. Ge 161. Plate Tectonics.   ab or equivalent. Geophysical and geological observations related to   sphere; marine magnetic and paleomagnetic measurements; seismicity  and tectonics of plate boundaries; reference frames and absolute plate   -Ge 162. Seismology.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: ACM  95/100 ab or equivalent. Review of concepts in classical seismology.   instrumentation, Earth™s structure and tomography, theory of the seismic  source, physics of earthquakes, and seismic risk. Emphasis will be  placed on how quantitative mathematical and physical methods are   Ge 163. Geodynamics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: Ae/ Ge/ME 160 ab. Quantitative introduction to the dynamics of the earth,  including core, mantle, lithosphere, and crust. Mechanical models are  developed for each of these regions and compared to a variety of data  sets. Potential theory applied to the gravitational and geomagnetic  Ge 164. Mineral Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites:  Ge 11 ad or equivalent, or instructor™s permission.  Introduction to the   phase transitions at high pressures and temperatures; elasticity and  equations of state; vibrational, electronic, and transport properties;  application of mineral physics data to Earth and planetary interiors. Ge 165. Geophysical Data Analysis and Seismic Imaging. 9 units  transforms.     Ge 166. Hydrology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Math 1  or equivalent. Introduction to hydrology. Focus will be on how water  moves on earth, including in groundwater, rivers, oceans, glaciers, and   Geological and Planetary Sciences618  tsunami propagation, geostrophic currents, Ekman transport, glacier   2021-2022.Ge 167. Tectonic Geodesy.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: a working knowledge of unix/linux or equivalent, linear algebra,  and coursework in geophysics. An introduction to the use of modern  geodetic observations (e.g., GPS and InSAR) to constrain crustal  dependent processes; volcano deformation and seasonal loading phe -nomena. Basic inverse approaches for parameter estimation and basic    Ge 169 abcd. Readings in Geophysics.  third, fourth terms.   to read critically the work of others and to broaden their knowledge    to give an assessment of how well the author achieved those goals,  and to point out related issues not discussed in the paper. Each stu -   -vidual terms may be taken for credit multiple times without regard to   ESE/Ge/Ch 171. Atmospheric Chemistry I. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.  ESE/Ge/Ch 172. Atmospheric Chemistry II. 3 units (3-0-0). For  course description, see Environmental Science and Engineering.  CE/ME/Ge 173. Mechanics of Soils. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. For  course description, see Civil Engineering.ME/CE/Ge 174. Mechanics of Rocks. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For  course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Ge 177. Active Tectonics.  12 units (3-3-6); third term. Prerequisites:  Ge 112 and Ge 106 or equivalent. Introduction to techniques for  identifying and quantifying active tectonic processes. Geomorphology,  stratigraphy, structural geology, and geodesy applied to the study of  active faults and folds in a variety of tectonic settings. Relation of seis-micity and geodetic measurements to geologic structure and active  tectonics processes. Review of case studies of selected earthquakes.   619Ge/ESE/Bi 178. Microbial Ecology.  -Structural, phylogenetic, and metabolic diversity of microorganisms in nature. The  course explores microbial interactions, relationships between diversity microbial community structure on biogeochemical cycles. Introduction to ecological principles and molecular approaches used in microbial ecology and geobiological investigations.  Instructor: Orphan.   Ge 190. The Nature and Evolution of the Earth.  Units to be ar-  Advanced-level discussions  of problems of current interest in the earth sciences. Students may  enroll for any or all terms of this course without regard to sequence.   Ge 191. Special Topics in Geochemistry.  Units to be arranged. Of-fered by announcement only. Advanced-level discussions of problems  of current interest in geochemistry. Students may enroll for any or all   Ge 192. Special Topics in the Geological Sciences.  Units to be ar- Advanced-level discussions of  problems of current interest in the geological sciences. Students may  enroll for any or all terms of this course without regard to sequence.   Ge 193. Special Topics in Geophysics.   by announcement only.  Advanced-level discussions of problems of  current interest in geophysics. Students may enroll for any or all terms   Ge 194. Special Topics in Planetary Sciences: Europa Seminar.  Units to be arranged. First term. Advanced-level discussions of prob -lems of current interest in planetary sciences. Students may enroll for   Brown. Ge 195. Special Topics in Field Geology.   by announcement.   -ence. This course will be scheduled only when special opportunities  Ge 196. Special Topics in Atmospheres and Oceans.  Units to be  Advanced-level discussions of problems of current interest in atmospheric and ocean sciences.  Ge 197. Special Topics in Geobiology.   by announcement only.  Advanced-level discussions of problems of cur -Geological and Planetary Sciences620rent interest in geobiological sciences. Students may enroll for any or all   Ay/Ge 198.  Special Topics in the Planetary Sciences.  ; third term.  For course description, see Astrophysics. Ge 211. Applied Geophysics II. Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  -ence in either marine or continental settings. Marine option will include participation in a student training cruise, with several weeks aboard a  geophysical research vessel, conducting geophysical measurements   processing and interpreting the data. Supporting lectures and problem  sets on the theoretical basis of the relevant geophysical techniques and  the tectonic background of the survey area will occur before and during   other isolated situations. The course will be scheduled only when op-be given. Auditing not permitted. Class may be taken more than once.   Ge 212. Thermodynamics of Geological Systems.  term. Prerequisites: Either Ch 21 abc, Ge 115 a, or equivalents.  Chemi-cal thermodynamics as applied to geological and geochemical problems.  Classical thermodynamics, including stability criteria, homogeneous and    electrolyte conventions. Brief discussion of statistical foundations and an    Ge 214. Spectroscopy of Minerals.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prereq -uisites: Ge 114 a, Ch 21 ab, or instructor™s permission.  An overview of the interaction of minerals with electromagnetic radiation from gamma  rays to microwaves. Particular emphasis is placed on visible, infrared,    -  Ge 215. Topics in Advanced Petrology.  Prerequisite: Ge 115 ab or instructor™s permission.  Lectures, readings,  -    Ge 217. Radiogenic Isotopes Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  Pre -requisites: Ge 140b or permission of instructor.  The course deals with advanced topics in radiogenic isotope geochemistry and builds on Ge 621 as treating several conventional radiogenic systems in more detail.  Topics to be covered will be guided by class interests. Given in alternate   Ge 218. Stable Isotopes Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3); second term. Pre -requisites: Ge 140 or permission of instructor.  The course deals with  in stable isotope geochemistry, selected by consensus of the enrolled   -timetry; the early solar system; terrestrial weathering; photochemistry;  or biosynthetic fractionations. The class will read and discuss classic  papers in that subject area, supplemented with instructor lectures and  broader background reading. All participants will lead discussions of    Ge 219. Non-traditional Isotopes Seminar.  6 units (2-0-4); third term.  Prerequisites: Ge 140a or b, or permission of instructor.  The course traditional isotope systems (Mg, Fe, Ti, Mo, U, etc.). Starting with close of the remaining outstanding questions. Topics to be covered will be   -lar system, nucleosynthetic anomalies, the early Earth, -entiation,  All participants will lead discussions of papers and present a lecture on    CE/Ge/ME 222. Earthquake Source Processes, Debris Flows, and  Soil Liquefaction: Physics-based Modeling of Failure in Granular  Media. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  For course description, see Civil Engineering.Ae/AM/ME/Ge 225. Special Topics in Solid Mechanics.  Units to be arranged. For course description, see Aerospace.  Ge/Bi 244. Paleobiology Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  Critical reviews and discussion of classic investigations and current research in   Ge/Bi/ESE 246. Molecular Geobiology Seminar.  term. Critical reviews and discussion of classic papers and current re -search in microbiology and geomicrobiology. As the topics will vary from     Geological and Planetary Sciences622Ge/ESE/Bi 248. Environmental Justice.  6 units (2-0-4); second term.  -tion of environmental racism, environmental justice, and academia.  Course material will primarily feature readings and videos on a case  study-like basis and focus on bringing conversations typically had in humanities, social sciences and activism to the bio and geosciences.  component that looks at environmental racism through the lens of  various activisms, and an ﬁinward-facingﬂ component addressing the bi - as well as the apparent moral dilemmas of decisions involving multiple  stakeholders. Out of class work will largely be based on assigned  readings, some multimedia presentations, and occasional writings and   Orphan.Ge 261. Advanced Seismology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Continua- structures and methods of interfacing numerical-analytical codes in two  and three dimensions; construction of Earth models using tomographic   Ge 263. Computational Geophysics.  - equations, some programming experience.   -sented and applied to a number of geophysical problems including heat     Ge 264. Machine Learning in Geophysics.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ge 118 or equivalent.  An overview of machine learn -ing algorithms and their usage in current geophysical research. Both su -pervised and unsupervised learning will be covered. Algorithms include  deep neural networks, ensemble learning, clustering, and dimensionality  reduction. The course will address data requirements, current limita -tions, and the role of machine learning in the future of geophysics.  In-Ae/AM/CE/ME/Ge 265 ab. Static and Dynamic Failure of Brittle  Solids and Interfaces, from the Micro to the Mega.  9 units; (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. ME/Ge/Ae 266 ab. Dynamic Fracture and Frictional Faulting.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.Bi/BE/Ch/ChE/Ge 269. Integrative Projects in Microbial Science and  Engineering. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Biology. 623Ge 270. Continental Tectonics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequi -sites: ACM 95/100 or ACM 113; Ge 11 ab, Ge 106, Ge 162, or Ge 161.    loads; rifting and associated basin development; collision and strike-  Ge 271. Dynamics of Seismicity.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. A compre - -cal laws for seismicity; spatial and temporal evolution of earthquake sequences; earthquake location algorithms; seismicity in crustal fault  regions; earthquake triggering; induced seismicity; tectonic tremor and   Ge 277. Active Tectonics Seminar.  6 units (2-0-4); second term. Discussion of key issues in active tectonics based on a review of the  literature. The topic of the seminar is adjusted every year based on    Ge 297. Advanced Study.  Units to be arranged. Ge/ESE 298. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year.  In consultation with a faculty advisor and the Caltech Center for Teaching, Learning, and Outreach, students may obtain credit   -ence; to mentor and tutor young people and underserved populations; or to otherwise contribute to the diversity, equity, and inclusiveness of   -tive (graduate students) or academic advisor (undergraduate students) if   Ge 299. Thesis Research.  Original investigation, designed to give train-ing in methods of research, to serve as theses for higher degrees, and to  HISTORY Hum/H 1. The Classical and Medieval Worlds.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 2. Freedom Dreams: African American Visions of Libera -tion Since Emancipation.. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.History624Hum/H 3. The United States in the Twentieth Century.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 4. Political, Social, and Intellectual Change in Early Modern  Europe.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 5. The History of the Chinese Empire.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 6. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: The Development  of Science from Babylon through the Renaissance.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 7. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: The Nature of  Religious Belief in Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Israel. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 8. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: Before Greece:  The Origins of Civilization in Mesopotamia. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 9. Europe Transformed.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 10. Medieval Europe: The Problem of Violence.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 11. Love and Death: Using Demography to Study the His-tory of Europe from 1700.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 12. Social Theory. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H 13. Brave New Worlds: Race, Human Rights and the Age of  Discovery.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 14. Race, Science, and Medicine in U.S.   9 units For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 15. Waste in the World.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 16. Visualizing the Heavens: Images and Instruments  of Early Modern Astronomy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 17. Making Life Legible: Materials and Methods in the History of Modern Biology.  9 units (3-0-6).  For course description, see Humanities.625Hum/H/HPS 18. Introduction to the History of Science.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/H 19. Righting the Wrongs of History.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.H 60. Reading in History.  Units to be determined for the individual by the division; any term. Reading in history and related subjects, done  either in connection with the regular courses or independently, but  under the direction of members of the department. A brief written report   humanities-social science requirement. E/H/VC 89. New Media Arts in the 20th and 21st Centuries. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.H 98. Reading in History.  9 units (1-0-8). Prerequisite: instructor™s  permission. An individual program of directed reading in history, in areas   H 99 abc. Research Tutorial.  9 units (1-0-8). Prerequisite: instructor™s  permission. Students will work with the instructor in the preparation   VC/H 102. Looking East/Looking West.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Visual Culture. H 107. The Early Middle Ages.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course is designed to introduce students to the formative period of West -ern medieval history, from roughly 300 to 1000 CE. It will emphasize the  development of a new civilization from the fusion of Roman, Germanic, and Christian traditions, with a focus on the Frankish world. The course  focuses on the reading, analysis, and discussion of primary sources. In-structor: Brown. Not offered 2021-2022. H 108. The High Middle Ages.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. This course is designed to introduce students to European history between 1000 and 1400. It will provide a topical as well as chronological examination of the economic, social, political, and religious evolution of western Europe during this period, with a focus on France, Italy, England, and Germany.  The course emphasizes the reading, analysis, and discussion of primary sources. Instructor: Brown. Not offered 2021-2022.  H 109. Medieval Knighthood. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course tells the story of the knight from his beginnings in the early Middle Ages,   and transformation in the late medieval and early modern periods. The  course treats the knight not simply as a military phenomenon but also    History626H 111. The Medieval Church.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course takes students through the history of the medieval Christian Church   power in the high Middle Ages, to its decline on the eve of the Reforma-tion. The course focuses on the church less as a religion (although it  will by necessity deal with some basic theology) than as an institution that came to have an enormous political, social, cultural, and economic impact on medieval life, and for a brief time made Rome once more the   H 112. The Vikings.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will take historical problem. What were the Vikings, where did they come from,   pirates and raiders who preceded them? Were they really the horned- helmeted, bloodthirsty barbarians depicted by modern popular media      H 123. Ordinary People: Uncovering Everyday Life in the European  Past. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. In the historical record, much atten -tion is given to wealthy elites (rulers and lawmakers, aristocrats, wealthy merchants), since they were the ones who left written records of their  about the vast majority of people who lived in the past, most of whom were barely literate and had little opportunity to ‚make history™? What  can we know about them? This class focuses on the lives of ordinary  people, and the sources historians use to learn about them. Special at - in societies ranging from England in the west to Russia in the east.  In- H 125. Soviet Russia. Why was the Rus-sian Revolution of 1917 successful? And how did the Soviet system survive nearly 75 years? These questions will be addressed in the wider   social institutions in the pre- and post-revolutionary period. Subjects  covered include the ideological underpinnings of Bolshevism, Lenin and  the command economy, World War II, the Krushchev ‚thaw™, dissident  culture and the arts, popular culture, and Gorbachev™s perestroika. A  variety of sources will be used, including secondary historical literature,  H/HPS 130. Technology and Environment in America.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  As climate change has become an increasingly heated  topic around the world, Americans across political and professional  arenas often invoke technology as both a cause and potential solution.  In American culture, an enthusiasm for innovation often overshadows  627the messier ways that humans interact with our surroundings through  the artifacts and technologies that we create. In this course, we will   from before the arrival of Europeans on the North American continent  through present debates about our changing planet. We will consider   and material landscape of America. How useful are these boundaries?  How might challenging them help us rethink America™s history and its  future? In this seminar, students will practice using the tools and meth -ods of history to make a clear, persuasive argument. Each student will  choose a relevant term project topic in consultation with the instructor.  Assignments throughout the term will cumulatively build into an original  piece of writing grounded in primary and secondary source research. In   -nology and the environment in American history, both to learn about the  -tive, readable historical writing. Students will learn how to use archival  the discussion, debate, and consensus necessary to build a dynamic H 131. History of Extinction. Humans are in   years, and this course takes an interdisciplinary approach to learn -  technologies, habitats, and ways of living. Central to our endeavors will And if so, how do we mourn for what many or most of us do not see,     H 132. Humanistic Ecology.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Humans™ conceptions of nature have changed dramatically over time. Ecological    number of cultural, political, historical and economic elements to better   for the study of ecology, and in a fundamental way, focuses on the ap - or not, what is useful, or not, and a variety of other matters that should be considered when taking a fully three-dimensional view of ecological   History628H 133. Forests and Humans.  Forests - which   roles in enhancing the planet™s biodiversity. Forests have also served  humans in numerous and often controversial ways, and have also  been subjected to dramatic change through human activity. How well  have we served forests, as well as being served by them? The class  will cover the growth and use of forests from a humanistic and historic    Lewis.H 134. Birds, Evolution, Speciation and Society.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term.   natural world. This course will cover our changing understandings of birds,  starting with hawking and falconry in earlier centuries, through the discov -ery of new species, up through Darwinian understandings of speciation and   capabilities and their ties to humankind, as well as to other anchors in the  natural world. We will take a strong biographical as well as avian approach  to understanding key personalities who furthered our understandings of  H 135. War, Conquest, and Empires.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This some periods of history were times of warfare and why certain countries  come from the history of Europe and Asia, from ancient times up until  World War I, and the emphasis throughout will be on the interplay   H 136. Caltech in the Archives.  This class will  introduce students to the methods of archival work in the humanities and  social sciences. Over the course of the quarter students will receive an   various types of archives as a background to several small-scale projects  working in an archival collection of their own choosing. The seminar will  center around weekly projects and synthetic analytical essays about the  archival process and archival discoveries. Students hoping to combine their  course work with an archive-based research paper may sign up for a sepa -rate independent study and conduct research concurrently, with instructor   H 137. Criminals, Outlaws, and Justice in a Thousand Years of Chi -nese History.   boundary between discourses of crime and disobedience over the last  - who commit it as a basis for a wide-ranging series of discussions about when breaking the law is good, when breaking the law is bad, and who  629gets to decide where the line between a criminal and an outlaw should   H 138. The Way.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course introduces  students to some of the seminal writings on the meaning of life, the essentials of rulership, and the place of the individual in the universe from the history of Chinese thought and philosophy. Students are given  selected readings from several schools of thought in Chinese history,  with an emphasis on the formative Warring States era (the period of  the Hundred Schools of classical Chinese philosophy). Instead of being     - H 139. Translation Theory and Practice (Chinese Historical Sources  Seminar). 9 units (3-0-6).  Dykstra.H/L 142. Perspectives on History through Russian Literature.  9 The Russian intelligentsia registered the arrival  of modern urban society with a highly articulate sensitivity, perhaps   hierarchies and social bonds, the questioning of traditional beliefsŠ came to Russia so suddenly. This gives their writings a paradigmatic  quality; the modern dilemmas that still haunt us are made so eloquently  - English translation) against the background of Russian society, focusing  especially on particular works of Chekhov, Dostoevsky, Goncharov,   H 149. Age of Fracture: America Since 1974.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term.   of fracture and social disaggregation. Using fracture as a conceptual  framework to investigate American politics and culture in the last quar -ter of the twentieth century, we™ll consider how the recent past has in -formed present-day American society. Themes of study will include the   gap. In addition, we™ll investigate the theoretical and methodological   H 152. Where Do We Go from Here? Black America in the Post-Civil  Rights Era.. American politics, culture, and society in the decades following the pas -sage of landmark civil rights legislation in the 1960s. Topics of discus -  artifacts as well as cutting-edge secondary literature, we will investigate  History630various moments in recent African American history to gain insight into   - H/HPS 153. Inequality and Environment.    This seminar introduces students to the history of environmental inequality,  environmental racism, and environmental justice. Human bodies are inescapably enmeshed in our environments: human health and environ-are distributed unevenly along lines of race, gender, class, and national -ity. We will examine local, national, and transnational case studies to  understand the historical development of environmental inequalities and movements for environmental justice. We will consider different methods  for studying environmental injustice and the politics of environmental knowledge.  Instructor: LeBlanc.H/HPS 154. Feminist Science Studies. 9 units (3-0-6); second  term. This seminar offers an introduction to scholarship on gender and  science. Feminist science studies can seem oxymoronic: the objectivity on which science depends appears opposed to the political commit-ments feminism implies. Scholars in feminist science studies, however,  practice. This course will introduce students to the historical develop - theories of sex/gender, and the future of feminist research. This reading- heavy class will also include discussions of feminist epistemology,  feminist research methods, and new directions in feminist STS. Instruc -tor: LeBlanc.H/HPS 155. Mortality Crises and Social Change: Epidemic Disease from 1300 to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  What do we know  Black Death in the 14th century to the current coronavirus pandemic, with attention given to the impact of epidemics on societies, the ways  in which such outbreaks have been understood over time and the kinds  of responses they have elicited. We will draw on studies for a range  of societies in order to identify patterns across space and time, and to  highlight both continuity and change in the ways societies have dealt with  contagious diseases. Instructor: Dennison.H/HPS 156. COVID-19 and Other Pandemics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. How do we understand the COVID pandemic and the differential   be given to the state of medical science today and in the past, the under-standing of ethology, transmission, and symptoms; the role of scientists,  631fear, superstition, and misinformation across time. Instructor: Kormos- Buchwald. Not offered 2021-2022. HPS/H 157. What is History of Technology?.  9 units (3-0-6). For  course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.  HPS/H 158.  Planet. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philoso-phy of Science. HPS/H 160. Einstein and His Generation: The History of Modern  Physical Sciences. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History  and Philosophy of Science.  H 161. Selected Topics in History.   -ment. This is an advanced humanities course on a specialized topic in  History. It is usually taught by new or visiting faculty. The course may be  re-taken for credit except as noted in the course announcement. Limited    Staff, visitors.  HPS/H 162. Social Studies of Science. 9 units (3-0-6). For course  description, see History and Philosophy of Science.  VC/H/HPS 163. Science on Screen.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Visual Culture. VC/H/HPS 164. Fashion and Waste.  9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Visual Culture. HPS/H 166. Historical Perspectives on the Relations between Sci-ence and Religion. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History  and Philosophy of Science.HPS/H 167. Experimenting with History/Historic Experiment. 9 units  (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/H 168. History of Electromagnetism and Heat Science.  9 units  (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.  HPS/H 169. Selected Topics in the History of Science and Technol -ogy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy  of Science.  HPS/H 170. History of Light from Antiquity to the 20th Century.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Sci-ence.  HPS/H 171. History of Mechanics from Galileo through Euler.  9 units  (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.  History632HPS/H 172. History of Mathematics: A Global View with Close-ups.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of  Science.  HPS/H 173. Carving Nature™s Joints: Histories of Nature™s Order.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Sci-ence.  HPS/H 174. Vital Instruments: Biotechnology in Global Perspec -tive. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy  of Science.  HPS/H 175. Matter, Motion, and Force: Physical Astronomy from  Ptolemy to Newton. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History  and Philosophy of Science.HPS/H 176. The Occult Origins of Modern Science: Alchemy, Astrol -ogy, and Magic.  For course description, see  History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/H 180. Forbidden Knowledge. 9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see History and Philosophy of Science.H/HPS/VC 185. Angels and Monsters: Cosmology, Anthropology,  and the Ends of the World.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course   and workings of the cosmos in the realms of theology, physics, astrono -my, astrology, magic, and medicine. Attention is given to the position of  humans as cultural creatures at the intersection of nature and spirit; as  well as to the place of Christian Europeans in relation to non-Christians  and other categories of outsiders within and beyond Europe. We will     H/HPS/VC 186. From Plato to Pluto: Maps, Exploration and Culture  from Antiquity to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course   -tion from Antiquity to the present. These topics range from the earliest   techniques in interplanetary navigation. By way of maps, students will   navigated earth and space. While maps emulate the world as perceived  by the human eye, they, in fact, comprise a set of observations and  perceptions of the relationship between bodies in space and time. Thus,      H/L 191. Perspectives on History through German Literature.  9 units  (3-0-6); third term.   633came to Germany much later than to England and France, and the forms   character of Central Europe. German-speaking writers and intellectuals  saw these trends from the perspective of indigenous intellectual tradi -tions, and the resulting collisions of values and priorities largely shaped  European and American social, political, and literary debates for much of   -ings (in English translation) against the historical background of Central    H 192. The Crusades. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course will introduce students to the series of religiously motivated European inva -sions of the Middle and Near East that began at the end of the eleventh century and that led to the creation of Latin Christian principalities in  Palestine. Though the crusading movement came to embroil much of   what the Crusaders called the Holy Land, and the history of the Crusad-er states up to the point of their destruction at the end of the thirteenth  medieval Christianity justify wars of aggression against foreign peoples  and religions? What motivated western Europeans to leave their homes  and march into a hostile environment, where they often faced impover -ishment if not death and where maintaining a Christian presence was a  constant struggle? How did they manage to erect stable political enti -ties in alien territory that lasted as long as they did, and how did they have to adapt their own culture to do so? Finally, how did the native  peoples of the regions the Crusaders invaded and conqueredŠMuslim  but also Christian and Jewish Š perceive the Crusaders? How did the    2021-2022.En/H 193. Cervantes, Truth or Dare: Don Quixote in an Age of Em -pire.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see English.En/H 197. American Literature and the Technologies of Reading.  9 units (3-0-6); For course description, see English.H 201. Reading and Research for Graduate Students.  Units to be determined for the individual by the division. HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE  Hum/H/HPS 14.  Race, Science, and Medicine in U.S. History.  9 units For course description, see Humanities.History and Philosophy of Science634Hum/H/HPS 15.  Waste in the World.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 16. Visualizing the Heavens: Images and Instruments  of Early Modern Astronomy.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 17. Making Life Legible: Materials and Methods in the History of Modern Biology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/H/HPS 18. Introduction to the History of Science.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. HPS 98. Reading in History and Philosophy of Science. 9 units (1-0-8). Prerequisite: instructor™s permission.  An individual program of  directed reading in history and philosophy of science, in areas not cov - HPS 102 ab. Senior Research Seminar.  12 units (2-0-10).  any two consecutive terms, by arrangement with HPS faculty. Under the  guidance of an HPS faculty member, students will research and write     -ond term, students will draft and revise their paper. Open to seniors in  the HPS option and to others by special permission of an HPS faculty  HPS 103. Public Lecture Series.   Stu-dent attend four lectures, featuring speakers from outside Caltech, on  topics in the history and philosophy of science. Students may choose from a variety of regularly scheduled HPS lectures, including HPS  seminars, Harris lectures, and Munro seminars (history or philosophy of  science only). Graded on attendance. Not available for credit toward the   Visiting lecturers.  HPS/Pl/CS 110. Causation and Explanation. 9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term. philosophy and neighboring disciplines. Topics discussed may include  probabilistic and counterfactual treatments of causation, the role of       HPS/Pl 120. Introduction to Philosophy of Science.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. An introduction to fundamental philosophical problems  concerning the nature of science. Topics may include the character of  635 philosophical accounts of the concept of ﬁlaw of nature,ﬂ causation,  chance, realism about unobservable entities, the objectivity of science,  HPS/Pl 122. Probability, Evidence, and Belief.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Philosophical and conceptual issues arising from the study of  probability theory and how it relates to rationality and belief. Topics dis -cussed may include the foundations and interpretations of probability,  arguments for and against the view that we ought to have personal de -grees of belief, rational change in beliefs over time, and the relationship  between probability and traditional epistemological topics like evidence,   HPS/Pl 123. Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ph 1abc or instructor™s permission.  This -    HPS/Pl 124. Philosophy of Space and Time. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will focus on questions about the nature of space and  time, particularly as they arise in connection with physical theory. Topics   relationship between geometry and physical space (or space-time);  entropy and the direction of time; the nature of simultaneity; and the   HPS/Pl 125. Philosophical Issues in Quantum Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Ph 2b, Ph 12b, or Ch 21a.  This course will focus on philosophical and foundational questions raised by quan-theory? Is the theory deterministic or indeterministic? What is the role  of measurement and observation? Does the wave function always obey  description of the state of a system? Are there parallel universes? How   HPS/Pl 128. Philosophy of Mathematics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term.  -cal objects such as numbers in some sense real? How do we obtain  knowledge of the mathematical world? Are proofs the only legitimate  source of mathematical knowledge? What is the relationship between  mathematics and the world? How is it possible to apply abstract theory  History and Philosophy of Science636 -  H/HPS 130. Technology and Environment in America.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. HPS/Pl 136. Happiness and the Good Life.  and positive psychology, its philosophical assumptions, methodology,  and its role in framing social policy and practice. Topics to be addressed   life satisfaction and philosophical visions of the good life; the relation  between happiness and virtue; the causes of happiness and the role  attempts to measure happiness, and the prospect for an economics of  happiness; happiness as a brain state and whether brain science can illuminate the nature of happiness; mental illness and psychiatry in light   HPS/Pl 138. Human Nature and Society.  This course will investigate how assumptions about human nature shape  political philosophy, social institutions, and social policy. The course will  psychologists as Freud and Skinner. Against this historical perspective,    potential implications for political philosophy and social policy. Among  topics to be discussed will be the nature of human sociality and coop -eration; economic systems and assumptions regarding production and    HPS/Pl 139. Human Nature, Welfare, & Sustainability.  9 units (3-0-Policy makers since at least the time of Jeremy Bentham     have all coincided as key drivers of human development. Although the inclusive and sustainable economic growth, there is substantial debate   welfare, economic growth, and material culture to better understand  why economic growth and welfare have been taken to be intertwined  will be the Brundtland report, its conception of welfare based on human  needs, and subsequent articulations of needs-based theories of human welfare, including evolutionary and biological accounts that include  637social comparison processes such as esteem, status, and recognition.  This will provide us with a theoretical framework for investigating the  role of material culture in satisfying these needs and whether they may   H/HPS 153. Inequality and Environment.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. H/HPS 154. Feminist Science Studies. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. H/HPS 155. Mortality Crises and Social Change: Epidemic Disease from 1300 to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. H/HPS 156. COVID-19 and Other Pandemics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. HPS/H 157. What is History of Technology?.  term. Visible and invisible technologies dominate the present, deeply  impacting our personal, social and political lives. This advanced class   culture, primarily in Western Europe and the United States. We will  examine the histories of selected technologies (rocketry, computing,  robotics); the circulation of knowledge and the creation of networks (transportation, communication, energy, surveillance); real and imagined  infrastructural mega-projects (Suez Canal, Atlantropa, Channel tunnel,  Transrapid, Iridium); and the role of experts and technocratic elites. As  the class combines the discussion of competing methodologies with the of historical research with particular relevance to future scientists and engineers. Instructor: Geppert. Planet. 9 units (3-0-6); second term.  -tion and the Anthropocene, this advanced course charts the making of  planet Earth from the 1940s through the present. Individual sessions will be devoted to pertinent philosophical conceptions (biosphere, noösphere, Gaia); the visualized and photographed view of Earth from above (Small Steps, Whole Earth, Earthrise, Blue Marble, Blue Dot); the genealogy of space stations and space colonies (space mirrors, surveillance systems (Corona, GPS, BeiDou, Galileo); space-based communication infrastructures (Intelsat, Telstar, Iridium); as well as the   class. Instructor: Geppert.HPS/H 160. Einstein and His Generation: The History of Modern  Physical Sciences. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  History and Philosophy of Science638structured around the life and work of Albert Einstein (1879-1955), with  particular emphasis on the new theories of radiation, the structure of  matter, relativity, and quantum mechanics. While using original Einstein   -  personal, political, cultural, and sociological dimensions of science. HPS/H 162. Social Studies of Science. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A science in a variety of locales, using methods from the history, sociol - the high-energy particle laboratory as compared with a biological one;    VC/H/HPS 163. Science on Screen.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Visual Culture. VC/H/HPS 164. Fashion and Waste.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Visual Culture. HPS/Pl 165. Selected Topics in Philosophy of Science.  9 units (3-0-  HPS/H 166. Historical Perspectives on the Relations between Sci-ence and Religion. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. The course devel-ops a framework for understanding the changing relations between  science and religion in Western culture since antiquity. Focus will be  on the ways in which the conceptual, personal, and social boundar-ies between the two domains have been reshaped over the centuries.   -   -HPS/H 167. Experimenting with History/Historic Experiment. 9 units (3-0-6). third term.  Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc, and Ph 2 abc (may be  taken concurrently).  This course uses a combination of lectures with  hands-on laboratory work to bring out the methods, techniques, and  knowledge that were involved in building and conducting historical   claims made by the original discoverers, asking such questions as how   arise and are handled, and what sorts of conditions make historically    -magnetic induction, or resonating circuits and electric waves. We will  639  HPS/H 168. History of Electromagnetism and Heat Science.  9 units  (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc, and Ph 2 abc (may be taken  concurrently).  This course covers the development of electromagne -tism and thermal science from its beginnings in the early 18th century  through the early 20th century. Topics covered include electrostatics,   second laws of thermodynamics, and statistical mechanics as well as   2021-2022.HPS/H 169. Selected Topics in the History of Science and Technol -ogy.  9 units (3-0-6).  HPS/H 170. History of Light from Antiquity to the 20th Century.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc, and Ph 2  abc (may be taken concurrently). -ematical, and theoretical developments concerning light, from the  time of Ptolemy in the 2nd century A.D. to the production of electro - 2021-2022.HPS/H 171. History of Mechanics from Galileo through Euler.  9 units (3-0-6). Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc, and Ph 2 abc (may be taken con -currently).  This course covers developments in mechanics, as well as  related aspects of mathematics and models of nature, from just before  the time of Galileo through the middle of the 18th century, which saw    HPS/H 172. History of Mathematics: A Global View with Close- ups.  The course will provide  students with a brief yet adequate survey of the history of mathemat-   the changing meanings of ﬁanalysisﬂ in mathematics, Descartes™ ana-  2021-2022.HPS/H 173. Carving Nature™s Joints: Histories of Nature™s Order.  9 units (3-0-6); second term.   -each kind according to its species along its natural joints, and to try not to splinter any part, as a bad butcher might do.ﬂ In a similar sentiment, History and Philosophy of Science640How have scientists and laypeople perceived similarities and differences    course explores these and related questions historically. We will consider  different approaches to making sense of nature, and how a multitude of  perspectives have been brought to bear on this ordering project. Topics  racism, gender and sex differences, disease categories and immune  selfhood, and symbioses and biogeochemical cycles. Instructor: Kollmer. HPS/H 174. Vital Instruments: Biotechnology in Global Perspec -tive. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Humans excel at using other organisms, including other humans, as means to ends. From the beginnings of agriculture, our species has cultivated crops, livestock, and microbial fermenters as living technologies of production. In modern industrial economies, human uses of life have undergone radical changes, as have the values humans assigned different forms of life. Agriculture  times over. Scaled-up fermentation techniques served to preserve food,  manufacture drugs, and process wastes. In vitro fertilization and somatic cell nuclear transfer permitted dramatic interventions in sexual reproduc-tion. This course will explore these and other histories of biotechnology  across different temporal, geographic, and cultural contexts, paying  special attention to the ambivalent relationships that arose between user and used in such instrumentalizations of life. Instructor: Kollmer. HPS/H 175. Matter, Motion, and Force: Physical Astronomy from  Ptolemy to Newton. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. --  HPS/H 176. The Occult Origins of Modern Science: Alchemy,  Astrology, and Magic.   Modern science is often described as a rational, empirical, and objective search for truth about nature. But how, when, and why did science come to acquire  discoveries of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Europe-the -superstition, or myth. However, that is far from the truth. In this course,   astrology, and magic, played in the formation of modern science. Our  studies of the occult sciences will force us to think more deeply about what distinguishes modern science from the occult sciences, and to question why their role in the development of modern science has also been obscured. Instructor: Gaida.641HPS/H 180. Forbidden Knowledge. Why does the notion of freedom of knowledge and teaching in science  and engineering matter? What kinds of restrictions have been placed  on scientists and engineers, their publications and institutions? Who  reasons; and how successfully? These questions will be addressed by   to protect the international circulation of knowledge after World War   balanced with the needs of national security. Case studies will include  the atomic bomb, the semiconductor industry in the 1970s and space  economics and military security posed by the Soviet Union in the Cold War, and by China today, has transformed the practice of research in  university and in industry alike building new walls around the production   while, being undermined by the global circulation of trained scientists   H/HPS/VC 185. Angels and Monsters: Cosmology, Anthropology,  and the Ends of the World.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. H/HPS/VC 186. From Plato to Pluto: Maps, Exploration and Culture  from Antiquity to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. HUMANITIES Hum/H 1. The Classical and Medieval Worlds.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond, third terms.  This course will survey the evolution of Mediterranean   the broad historical narrative of the periods. The readings will pres -ent students with the essential characteristics of various ancient and medieval societies and give students access to those societies™ cultural   2021-2022.Hum/H 2. Freedom Dreams: African American Visions of Liberation  Since Emancipation. Over the course of their history in the United States, African Americans have advanced various - their freedom dreams since the end of chattel slavery. We will focus,  in particular, on visions of freedom considered radical or utopian, both  in their contemporary moment and in our present. Investigating how  African Americans have imagined freer lives beyond their own localities,  Humanities642beyond U.S. borders, and even beyond Earth, our topics of discussion  in the course may include emigration movements, black communism, pan-Africanism, black feminism, cults, Afrofuturism, hip hop culture, and  Hum/H 3. The United States in the Twentieth Century.  9 units (3-0-6); Designed to introduce students to the academic study of   political, social, and cultural history of the United States in the Twentieth  Century. Through a wide variety of historical sourcesŠincluding primary   popular culture, immigration and labor, the civil rights movement, politi -  Hum/H 4. Political, Social, and Intellectual Change in Early Modern  Europe.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.   -the early modern period. It will also introduce students to real works  of history. Reading will therefore include not just classic writings by  contemporaries, but works by professional historians. The focus will be  on big political questions posed by the history of early modern Europe,   morality play in politics? What do we want out of government at a time  when states are weak-one that is strong enough to secure our lives and  our property in the midst of ubiquitous violence or one that will pursue  a common democratic purpose? If we value security above all else, what will protect us against a state dictatorship? And what provokes  revolutions-ideas, material interests, or strategic political behavior?  In-Hum/H 5. The History of the Chinese Empire.  second terms.    interaction of event, record, and remembrance as these components  combine in the creation and contestation of history. This course will    to give students a new perspective on the relationship between action,   Hum/H 6. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: The Develop -ment of Science from Babylon through the Renaissance.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  Connections in antiquity between astrology  and astronomy, early theories of light, Islamic science, new concepts  of knowledge during the European Middle Ages and Renaissance, the  early laboratory, the development of linear perspective, the origins of  the Copernican and Keplerian systems of astronomy, and the science of  643Hum/H 7. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: The Nature of  Religious Belief in Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Israel. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  -  origins of concepts of moral death and of sin as a violation of cosmic order in antiquity, the nature of polytheism, and the manner in which  monotheism arose out of it. In addition to historical analyses the course  includes readings by anthropologists who have studied cult structures  as well as contemporary theories by evolutionary psychologists.  Instruc- Hum/H 8. Civilization, Science, and Archaeology: Before Greece:  The Origins of Civilization in Mesopotamia. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  This course will introduce students to the early development   B.C.E. Origins of agriculture and writing, the evolution of the city, and  the structures of the Mesopotamian economy and social order will be  discussed. Comparison with contemporary developments in Egypt dur-ing the Old and Middle Kingdoms may include a reading of Gilgamesh   -   Hum/H 9. Europe Transformed.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Will intro -duce students to major aspects of the politics and culture of modernity  that have profoundly transformed Western society and consciousness  from the French Revolution to the contemporary era. A variety of histori -cal, literary, and artistic works will be used to illuminate major social,  and wide-ranging historical change (e.g., the industrial revolution, im -perialism, socialism, fascism); on cultural innovation (e.g., modernism,   - Hum/H 10. Medieval Europe: The Problem of Violence.  9 units (3-0-  the various norms that governed the use of violence in a period when  the right of free people to carry and use weapons was considered   relationship between violence and vengeance, the law, central authority  and public order, religion, emotions, public ritual, and economics. As    Humanities644Hum/H 11. Love and Death: Using Demography to Study the History of Europe from 1700.   Demographic eventsŠbirths, marriages, deathsŠhave always been highly responsive  to changes in the local environment. Decisions about when to marry,  how many children to have, or what kind of household to live in have al -ways been closely correlated to decisions people take in other areas of  their lives and, as a result, can tell us a great deal about the economic,  -ences in demographic trends in Europe across space and time, from   -es, including political economic factors, social and cultural norms, biol-  the emergence of reliable contraceptive technologies; changes related   Hum/H 12. Social Theory.   This course intro-duces students to both canonical and non-canonical theories of society.  From the formative debates over the role of the state in human affairs  in early modern Europe to radical interpretations of social good in the twentieth century, students will be exposed to competing theories of so -ciety and their implications in the political, the economic, the emotional,  to link contemporary notions of individuality, agency, rationality, morality,  and ethics to divergent discourses in the history of social theory.  Instruc-tor: Dykstra. Not offered 2021-2022. Hum/H 13. Brave New Worlds: Race, Human Rights and the Age  of Discovery.  This course traces the origins of modern racism and, perhaps surprisingly, of human rights  advocacy itself, to a seminal moment in global history sometimes called the Age of Discovery. At this time, two small European kingdoms, Spain    truly global empires. We study the legacy of racism and humanitarianism  in eye-witness accounts, maps, images and other materials attesting to   Hum/H/HPS 14. Race, Science, and Medicine in U.S. History.  9 units This course will explore how natural philosophers and race from the eighteenth century to today. Using a range of primary and  developed in concert with European imperial expansion and slavery; how these ideas were employed in legal cases, medical practice, and eugenics policies; and how activists and scholars have challenged rac-ist practices and ideas. Finally, we will turn to the recent resurgence of  racial thinking in biology and medicine in the light of the history of race and science. Instructor: LeBlanc.645Hum/H/HPS 15. Waste in the World.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. The things that human beings make and throw away rarely stay where we put them. Just as humans have shaped the biological and physical world, the biological and physical world shapes human actions. In this course, we will examine how these interacting forces propel environmental and cultural change around the world. We will explore  these concepts through the lens of waste -- how different groups at   and what they become as they move through space and time. We will   -tural and historical contexts have factored into shifting ideas about race, class, gender, wilderness, technology, consumption, and sovereignty.  assess the roots of sustainability, and evaluate past events in light of  current ideas about environmental justice. While this course prioritizes reading and discussion, we will also engage with the world around us through visual analysis. Pasadena and Los Angeles will be among our  most important resources, allowing us to ground global ideas in a local context. Instructor: Rand.Hum/H/HPS 16. Visualizing the Heavens: Images and Instruments  of Early Modern Astronomy.  In Europe during universe. Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a sun-centered, rather than earth-centered, cosmos. Galileo Galilei turned his telescope towards the heavens and observed the Moon, Sun, and moons of Jupiter, and  the voyages of discovery led to an expansion of the known world. At the  same time, the innovation of the printing press played a crucial role in disseminating information and in allowing for astronomical printed im-ages, including celestial atlases and maps, to reach a broad audience. Paintings of the heavens during this period are also a rich source of -- models, eclipse diagrams, almanacs, and printed instruments, alongside astrolabes, telescopes, and celestial globes, to uncover how images and for the early modern world. Instructor: Gaida.Hum/H/HPS 17. Making Life Legible: Materials and Methods in the History of Modern Biology.   This course is an introductory exploration of the stuff of modern biology - the practices  and objects that biologists have used to produce knowledge of living nature in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The course will look at  how familiar concepts (e.g. the cell, evolution, the gene) were shaped  approach will allow us to situate biological inquiries within wider political and cultural contexts, while also drawing our attention to the way instru-ments mediated perceptions in the recording of observations and the execution of experiments. We will trace continuities and changes in the  kinds of questions that naturalists and biologists posed, survey spaces Humanities646in which they pursued their work, and become acquainted with a variety of humans, nonhuman organisms, chemicals, and machines assembled in these spaces. These exercises will familiarize us with diverse forms of  labor in and beyond laboratories that have contributed to how humans understood the living world. Instructor: Kollmer. Not offered 2021-2022. Hum/H/HPS 18. Introduction to the History of Science.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.   origins of modern Western science, when did it emerge as distinct from  philosophy and other cultural and intellectual productions, and what are    some of the major turning points in the history of science? What is the  changing role of science and technology? Using primary and secondary   from ancient Greek science to the 20th-century revolution in physics,     as a history course in satisfying the freshman humanities breadth re - Hum/H 19. Righting the Wrongs of History.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. In recent years, growing numbers of people committed to equity and social justice have discussed various ways of addressing historical injustices whose harms are still experienced in the present. Some have proposed monetary restitution and other restorative strategies that ac-count for resources, opportunities, and lives lost. Others have advocated more symbolic reparative approaches that seek to heal the psychic wounds of injustice. This course will examine efforts to right the wrongs  of history, with particular attention given to the decades-long movement  for reparations for African Americans and recent efforts to address dif -and others that have been only imagined, in this course we will seek to understand both the possibilities and impossibilities of repairing historical harms. Instructor: Wiggins.Hum/En 20. Ancient Epic. For over 2,000 years, epic poetry was the foremost genre of literature. This most  prestigious kind of poetry was also unusually competitive and self- referential. Apollonius of Rhodes imitates and alludes to Homer, Virgil   Virgil™s political agenda, and Milton transforms the entire epic tradition.   Homer™s  Iliad and Odyssey, Apollonius of Rhodes™ Argonautica , Virgil™s  Aeneid, Ovid™s  Metamorphoses, Lucan™s  Civil War , and Milton™s  Paradise LostHum/En 21. Monsters and Marvels.  terms.  647processes and expected outcomes. From Grendel, the monstrous foe of  the uses of the marvelous in a variety of texts and genres, including Shakespearian drama, medieval romance, and early travel-writing. Readings may include Beowulf, Marie de France, Chaucer, John Man -deville, Shakespeare, Milton. Instructor: Jahner. Hum/En 22. Inequality.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Throughout the  history of Europe, America, and beyond, poets and philosophers have  asked hard questions about unequal relationships, whether between  kings and subjects, gods and humans, men and women, rich and poor,  or machines and people. Our authors take no single point of view; our  enter new cultural worlds. Readings may include Ovid, Milton, Sei Sho-Hum/En 23. Literature and Medicine.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The relationship between patients and doctors, the ill and the well, involves   at the relationship between medicine and narrative through a selection  doubt and diagnosis, the idea of the case study, the problem of medical  responsibility, and the language of pain and illness. Authors covered  may include Sontag, Mantel, Conan Doyle, Freud, Woolf, Dickinson,    9 This course considers three periods of major    and theories had on the imagination of English writers. We will look at  the early modern interplay between magic and science, Romantic and  Victorian debates about evolution, and the twentieth-century advent of  modern physics as we confront consistent tropes like the mad scientist,  the scientist-hero, and the problem of uncertainty. Authors covered may  include Shakespeare, Marlowe, Bacon, Shelley, Darwin, Conan Doyle,   Hum/En 25. The Human Animal. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Euro -pean literature has long been a testing ground for radical new ideas  which have come to shape our basic understanding of what it means to be a thinking, speaking and perhaps even autonomous human being.   -   to their cultural environments. Selected readings from Cervantes, La    Humanities648Hum/En 26. What Is Imagination? 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Albert Ein -stein once said that imagination is everything, and even more important than knowledge. This course invites you to think about - and use - your  imagination as we explore how the act of imagining has been viewed over time in the service of memory and creativity, in both the arts and the  sciences. Readings will focus on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and will include Hume, Moritz, Kant, Novalis, Hoffmann, Coleridge, and  Wordsworth.  Instructor: Holland. Not offered 2021-2022. Hum/En 27. Literature and the Problem of Belief.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. / Reach her, about must and about must go.ﬂ In this verse, John Donne  belief: it is at once a knowing and an unknowing. By tracing this pursuit through the writings of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment, we can explore how writers discovered belief and grappled with doubt, what inspiration they claimed and how they reckoned with failures of vision as -dictions of the spirit. In our own pursuit of the experience of belief, we shall read the prose and poetry of Margery Kempe, Montaigne, Herbert, Hutchinson, Milton, Defoe, Blake, Barbauld, and Coleridge. Instructor: Koch. Not offered 2021-2022. Hum/En 28. Killing Kings and Popish Plots: Literature in Revolu -tionary England. 9 units (3-0-6); second term.  following nearly a decade of civil war. The killing of the king was the  most traumatic of a series of political crises in England, from the divorce  of Henry VIII to the Glorious Revolution, from fabricated ‚popish™ plots   of political parties. In this course, we will study England™s response to  these moments of political trauma, asking questions and developing tools that might also equip us as we seek to understand and respond  to similar crises in our own age. How did the death of a king change political structures and ideas about revolution, freedom, and toleration?  What role did acts of public mourning and forgiveness play in healing  the nation? How were these traumatic events imagined, remembered,   monuments? As we study this age of revolution, we will read some of  the most important works of English literature by writers such as Shake -speare and Spenser, Milton and Marvell, Hutchinson and Behn.  Instruc-Hum/En 29. Dream Narratives.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Dream  narratives reveal as much about cultural beliefs and superstitions as  they do about techniques of narration and interpretation. This course  investigates key developments in the literature on dreams and dream   beginning of the nineteenth century. Selected readings from Boccaccio,  Descartes, Calderón, Shakespeare, and Diderot, among others.  Instruc- 649Hum/En 30. Reading Animals. In this course we will look closely at representations of nonhuman animals in literature  from the nineteenth century to the present as opportunities to revisit   ﬁhumanﬂ and the ﬁanimal.ﬂ Readings may include Darwin, Wells, Kafka,   Hum/En 31. Introduction to Black Literature and Culture in the  United States. As both a celebration and  introduction to Black literature and culture across several US geograph -ic regions from the standpoint of a variety of intersectional identities  literary lives of Black people have shaped US economic, political, and   -pression that have also become beloved touchstones in Black cultural   Black people have long informed the possibilities of American artistic  they provide possible blueprints for how US national life might unfold   methodologies for the study of Black literature and culture, propose     Hum/En 33. Modern Metamorphoses.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Narratives of metamorphosis have traditionally used their dramatic sub-ject matterŠa radical change of formŠas a vehicle for social criticism.  -ment with the concept of metamorphosis to take on the most pressing  political and social issues of their day, including slavery, women™s rights,   2022.Hum/En 34. Literature and Deception.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. In this course, we will be considering lying and other types of deception from the point of view of literature and philosophy, with two main goals  in mind: 1) to compare cultural practices of deception at various times in European history and 2) to think in general terms about the ability of a  have thought over time, is it more accurate to think about literature as a  as texts by Machiavelli, Shakespeare, Diderot, and those relating to the Ossian controversy.  Instructor: Holland.Hum/En 36. American Literature and Culture.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Studies of American aesthetics, genres, and ideas from the birth  of the nation to the present. Students will be introduced to the tech -Humanities650niques of formal analysis. We will consider what constitutes evidence in   may include Nature™s Nation, slavery and its aftermath, individualism  and the marketplace, the ﬁNew Woman,ﬂ and the relation between word   Hum/Pl 39. Ancient Greek Philosophy.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  An-cient Greek philosophy is not only the root of philosophy but of science -lic, in which Plato gives his views on almost all aspects of philosophical inquiry from metaphysics to political philosophy. The Republic is still one  of the best introductions to ancient philosophy, and it is surprisingly ac -cessible, also because it is written as a dialogue. We will be reading this   -phy.  Instructor: Hubert.Hum/Pl 40. Right and Wrong.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course  -als and as a society? What kind of person should one aspire to be?  Topics the course may deal with include meta-ethical issues (e.g.,  What makes an action right or wrong? When is one morally responsible   questions (e.g., Is eating meat morally acceptable? What should we tolerate and why? What are society™s obligations toward the poor?). In  addition, the psychological and neural substrates of moral judgment  sources, including selections from the great works of moral and political  philosophy (e.g., Aristotle™s Nichomachean Ethics, Hobbes™s Leviathan,  Kant™s Groundings for a Metaphysics of Morals, and Rawls™s A Theory  of Justice), contemporary discussions of particular moral issues, and Hum/Pl 41. Knowledge and Reality.  The theme of this course is the scope and limitations of rational belief  of the self, the nature of knowledge, and how we learn about the natural  world. Students will be introduced to these issues through selec -tions from some of the world™s greatest philosophical works, including  Descartes™s Meditations, Pascal™s Pensées, Hume™s Enquiry Concern -ing Human Understanding, Berkeley™s Principles of Human Knowledge,  and Kant™s Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics. A variety of more   Hitchcock.Hum/Pl 43. Meaning in Life. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. -   What does meaning in life imply regarding the metaphysics of value?  651What is the relation between meaning and welfare, achievement, and  goal-directedness? What sort of activities, from work to leisure, can  be sources of meaning in life? Drawing principally on recent work in   -proaches, principally neuroscience and psychology, can illuminate the    Hum/Pl 44. Philosophy Through Science Fiction.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. This course will provide a broad introduction to philosophy using    future; teleportation and what makes someone the same person over  futuristic utopias and the question of what make a life good; the moral status of aliens and animals; intelligent robots and the relation between  mind and body; parallel universes and the philosophical foundations of Hum/Pl 45. Ethics & AI. How do we reconcile  the possibilities of modern machine learning with ethical and moral  demands of fairness, accountability and transparency? This course will  take a case study-based approach to the challenges at the interface   Hum/Pl 46. Thinking about Climate Change. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. -sions of climate change and how broadening our discussions to incor -problem concerned with global distributive justice, intergenerational jus -tice, and the anthropocentric values of sustainability vs. challenges from    reactions to it, including both motivating and demotivating them to act.   broader understanding of climate change and how this may be used to   Hum/VC 48. Ways of Seeing.  of photography is just as important as that of the alphabet,ﬂ wrote artist pen.ﬂ Almost a century later, this pronouncement rings as true as ever  advertisements, and video games, cartoons and comics, molecular graphics and visual models. In this course we will explore how visual Humanities652wonder in its rich details. In doing so, we will develop the visual literacy that Moholy-Nagy envisioned: essential skills in reading, analyzing, dis-cussing, and writing about visual materials and their circulation through the physical and virtual networks that structure our world. Instructor: Jacobson.Hum/VC 49. Consuming Victorian Media.  term. Proliferating communication and entertainment media technolo -- -ings, sculptures) and ﬁnewﬂ forms of 19th-century media (telegraphs,   Gothic print media in Jane Austen™s Northanger Abbey, Wordsworth™s  contempt for popular entertainments in The Prelude, and the inversion  of imperial consumption in Bram Stoker™s Dracula, a novel mediated  through characters™ telegrams, diary entries, and phonographic record - Hum/VC 50. Introduction to Film. This entertainment medium from the 1880s to the present, with a focus on the - Edison Studio and Charlie Chaplin, M, The Seven Samurai, The Battle of Algiers, Unforgiven , and Black Panther. Instructor: Jurca.Hum/VC 51. Icons and Iconoclasm. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. How technology, politics and propaganda, this course explores what makes   range of methods for closely analyzing images as signs and symbols, in- histories of how objects have circulated through culture - from news-papers and magazines to postcards, jpegs, and memes - and thereby become ubiquitous features of everyday experience. Finally, we will  consider iconoclasm, the destruction of icons, and the beliefs and logics behind powerful interdictions against visual representation. Students will leave the course with a stronger understanding of image power as well as foundational tools of visual and media literacy.  Instructor: Jacobson.Hum/VC 52. The Legacy of the Mexican School in Black and Latino Artistic Imaginaries. 9 units (3-0-6); Artists in the United 653States greatly admired the Mexican muralists and printmakers of the 20th century. Respected as much for their cultural politics as their  artworks, the Mexican School attracted generations of Black and Latino artists who visited, studied and worked in Mexico. In the legends and practices of the Mexican School, American artists found models for  in the United States. This international exchange ultimately generated a  transnational aesthetic tradition of resistance to Euro-American coloniza-tion. This course begins with an introduction to the major debates of  Mexican printmaking and muralism; follows Mexican and U.S. artists half of the 20th century; and concludes with the legacy of the Mexican School on contemporary Black and Latinx public art practices. Instructor: Decemvirale.Hum 59. Special Topics in Humanities.   -nouncement. This course will count as a freshman humanities course  in either English, history, philosophy, or visual culture, as announced. It  is usually taught by new or visiting faculty. The course may be re-taken   English, history, philosophy, and visual culture). Limited to 15 students.   Hum 61. Environmental Justice.  6 units (2-0-4); second term. This  environmental racism, environmental justice, and academia. Course  material will primarily feature readings and videos on a case study-like  basis and focus on bringing conversations typically had in humanities, social sciences and activism to the bio and geosciences. Topics will   that looks at environmental racism through the lens of various activisms,   broadly employed in the biological and geosciences, as well as the  apparent moral dilemmas of decisions involving multiple stakeholders.  Out of class work will largely be based on assigned readings, some mul -  Hum 75. Selected Topics in Humanities.   announcement.  -    Hum 80. Frontiers in the Humanities.  1 unit (1-0-0); third term.  Weekly  seminar by a member of the Caltech humanities faculty or a visitor to discuss a topic of his or her current research at an introductory level.  Humanities654 within the humanities. For those interested in (or who become inter -ested) in pursuing a second option in the humanities, the course will introduce students to the kinds of research carried out by members of  Hum 101. Topics in French Culture.   Offered concurrently with  L 101. Hum 105 and Hum 101 taught in alternate years. The course  focuses on contemporary France. Topics may include France and the  European Union; political parties and elections; family life; social protec-tion; religion; education; media and technology. Conducted in French.  Students who write papers in French may enroll in this class as L 101.  Instructor: Orcel. Not offered 2021-2022.  Hum 105. Topics in French Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second  term.   Offered concurrently with  L 105. Hum 105 and Hum 101 taught in alternate years. Topics may  include 20th-century major French novels, French modern theatre,  the French Muslim identity. Conducted in French. Students who write  papers in French may enroll in this class as L 105.  Instructor: Orcel.Hum 114. Spanish Language Literature and its Film Adaptations.      -naissance to the present, through an array of male and female authors   Spain. Conducted in Spanish. Students who write papers in Spanish  Hum 115.  Hispanic Cultures in Film and Literature. 9 units (3-0-6);    Of- This course introduces students to  and narratives of Spain from the Civil War to the present. Conducted in  Spanish. Students who write papers in Spanish may enroll in this class as L 115. Instructor: Garcia. Not offered 2021-2022. Hum 119. Selected Topics in Humanities.   -nouncement. topic in some area of the humanities. It is usually taught by new or   in the course announcement. Limited to 15 students. See registrar™s an -655L/Hum 150. Japanese Literature in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.L/Hum 151.  Japanese Literature in Translation from Medieval to Pre- modern Japan. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.L/Hum 152. Classical French Literature in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.L/Hum 162. Spanish and Latin American Literature in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.Hum 174. Topics in Masterpieces of Chinese Writing.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.    Offered concurrent -ly with L 174. Reading and discussion of representative Chinese written  work throughout Chinese history, including philosophical texts and liter -ary works in different genres. Students are expected to examine these  works in light of their sociopolitical and historical contexts. Students who write papers in Chinese may enroll in this class as L 174. This course  can be repeated for credit when the course content changes. Instructor: Ming.INFORMATION AND DATA SCIENCES IDS 9. Introduction to Information and Data Systems Research.  1 unit (1-0-0); second term. This course will introduce students to  research areas in IDS through weekly overview talks by Caltech faculty   course to gain an understanding of the scope of research in computer   ACM/IDS 101 ab. Methods of Applied Mathematics. 12 units (4-4-4).  For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics.ACM/IDS 104. Applied Linear Algebra. 9 units (3-1-5). For course  description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics.CMS/ACM/IDS 107. Linear Analysis with Applications. 12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.CMS/ACM/IDS 113. Mathematical Optimization. 12 units (3-0-9). For  course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sciences.ACM/EE/IDS 116.  Introduction to Probability Models. . For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics. CS/IDS 121. Relational Databases. 9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Computer Science.Information and Data Sciences656IDS/Ec/PS 126. Applied Data Analysis.  -requisites: Math 3/103 or ACM/EE/IDS 116, Ec 122 or IDS/ACM/CS  157 or Ma 112a. Fundamentally, this course is about making arguments  with numbers and data. Data analysis for its own sake is often quite  boring, but becomes crucial when it supports claims about the world. A  convincing data analysis starts with the collection and cleaning of data,  a thoughtful and reproducible statistical analysis of it, and the graphical  presentation of the results. This course will provide students with the   to conduct their own data analysis. This course is not an introduction to  statistics or computer science. I assume that students are familiar with  at least basic probability and statistical concepts up to and including  regression. Instructor: Katz.EE/Ma/CS/IDS 127. Error-Correcting Codes. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.EE/Ma/CS/IDS 136. Topics in Information Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering.CMS/CS/IDS 139. Analysis and Design of Algorithms. 12 units  (3-0-9). For course description, see Computation and Mathematical  Sciences.  Ma/ACM/IDS 140 ab. Probability.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  For course description, see Mathematics.CS/IDS 142. Distributed Computing. 9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Computer Science.CS/EE/IDS 143. Communication Networks. 9 units (3-3-3). For  course description, see Computer Science.CMS/CS/EE/IDS 144. Networks: Structure & Economics.  12 units  (3-4-5). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical Sci-ences.CS/IDS 150 ab. Probability and Algorithms.  9 units (3-0-6). For  course description, see Computer Science.CS/IDS 153. Current Topics in Theoretical Computer Science.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computer Science.ACM/IDS 154. Inverse Problems and Data Assimilation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics.CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining.  12  units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computing and Mathematical  Sciences.657IDS/ACM/CS 157. Statistical Inference.  9 units (3-2-4); third  term. Prerequisites: ACM/EE/IDS 116, Ma 3.  Statistical Inference is  -ing reliable information from limited data for learning, prediction, and  decision making in the presence of uncertainty. This is an introductory   thinking and intuitive feel for the subject; introduce the most funda -mental ideas, concepts, and methods of statistical inference; and     likelihood, hypothesis testing, p-values, the Wald, Student™s t-, permu -tation, and likelihood ratio tests, multiple testing, scatterplots, simple  linear regression, ordinary least squares, interval estimation, prediction,    IDS/ACM/CS 158. Fundamentals of Statistical Learning.  9 units (3-3-3); third term.  Prerequisites: Ma 3 or ACM/EE/IDS 116, IDS/ACM/CS  157. The main goal of the course is to provide an introduction to the  central concepts and core methods of statistical learning, an interdisci - -tion and data sciences. The course focuses on the mathematics and statistics of methods developed for learning from data. Students will   (not just what tasks they solve and in what built-in functions they are im - is oriented for upper level undergraduate students in IDS, ACM, and   background in probability and statistics. The course can be viewed as a    problems, linear regression, subset selection, shrinkage methods,  logistic regression, linear discriminant analysis, resampling techniques,  tree-based methods, support-vector machines, and clustering methods.    CS/CNS/EE/IDS 159. Advanced Topics in Machine Learning.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computer Science.EE/CS/IDS 160. Fundamentals of Information Transmission and  Storage. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineer-ing.CS/IDS 162. Data, Algorithms and Society.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computer Science.CS/CNS/EE/IDS 165. Foundations of Machine Learning and Statisti -cal Inference.  12 units (3-3-6). For course description, see Computer Science.Information and Data Sciences658CS/EE/IDS 166. Computational Cameras. For course description, see Computer Science.EE/CS/IDS 167. Introduction to Data Compression and Storage.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.ACM/EE/IDS 170. Mathematics of Signal Processing.  12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics.CS/IDS 178. Numerical Algorithms and their Implementation. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Computer Science.IDS 197. Undergraduate Reading in the Information and Data Sci -ences.  second, third terms. Prerequisites: Consent of supervisor is required  before registering.  Supervised reading in the information and data sci -ences by undergraduates. The topic must be approved by the reading   IDS 198. Undergraduate Projects in Information and Data Sciences.   third terms. Prerequisites: Consent of supervisor is required before reg -istering. Supervised research in the information and data sciences. The  topic must be approved by the project supervisor and a formal report   IDS 199. Undergraduate thesis in the Information and Data Scienc -es.  planning the research.  Individual research project, carried out under the  supervision of a faculty member and approved by the option repre -  ACM/IDS 204. Topics in Linear Algebra and Convexity.  12 units (3-0-9). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics.ACM/IDS 213. Topics in Optimization.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics.ACM/IDS 216. Markov Chains, Discrete Stochastic Processes and  Applications. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied and Computational Mathematics.659INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY IST 4. Information and Logic. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The course -cal substrates, including representations of numbers, Boolean algebra   composition of functions and relations, implementing functions with   with state diagrams, state diagrams as a composition of Boolean func-tions and memory, and the implementation of computational processes   connected to advanced topics like programming, computability, logic,   -  INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES PROGRAM Students who have chosen to enter the Interdisciplinary Studies  Program (ISP) instead of a formulated undergraduate option may enroll  in special ISP courses. These courses are designed to accommodate  individual programs of study or special research that fall outside ordi -nary course offerings. The student and the instructor first prepare a  written course contract specifying the work to be accomplished and the time schedule for reports on progress and for work completed.  The units of credit and form of grading are decided by mutual agree -ment between the instructor, the student, and his or her advisory com - LANGUAGESL 101. Topics in French Culture.   terms.   Hum 101. L 105 and L 101 taught in alternate years. The course focuses  on contemporary France. Topics may include France and the European  Union; political parties and elections; family life; social protection; reli -gion; education; media and technology. Conducted in French. Students  who write papers in English may enroll in this class as Hum 101, which      L 102 abc. Elementary French.   terms.    -course is mainly designed for students with no previous knowledge of  Languages660French. Students who have had French in secondary school or college    L 103 abc. Intermediate French.   terms. Prerequisites: L 102 abc or equivalent.  T  -  compositions are required. The third term is designed to further develop  an active command of the language. A variety of 19th- and 20th-century short stories are discussed in class to improve comprehension and oral    L 104. French Cinema.   with VC 104. Prerequisites: L 103 abc or equivalent.  A critical survey of major directors, genres, and movements in French cinema. Particular   on problems of transposition from literature to cinema. The course   -  critical papers. Conducted in French. Students who write papers in    L 105.  Topics in French Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. -  Offered concurrently with Hum  105. L 105 and L 101 taught in alternate years. Topics may include the  -ing memories of the second world war, coming-of-age novels, and the  French Muslim identity. Conducted in French. Students who write papers  -vanced humanities requirement. Instructor: Orcel.L 106 abc. Elementary Japanese.  terms. Prerequisites: Section a is required for sections b and c.  Empha-sis on oral-aural skills, and understanding of basic grammar. Immedi -ate introduction of the native scriptŠhiragana, katakanaŠand gradual   L 107 abc. Intermediate Japanese.  terms. Prerequisites: L 106 abc or equivalent.  Continued instruction and practice in conversation, building up vocabulary, and understanding   - L 108 abc. Advanced Japanese. Prerequisites: L 107 abc or equivalent.  Developing overall language 661 -tion. Improvement of listening and speaking ability so as to communi -cate with Japanese people in real situations. Recognition of the 1,850  L/VC 109. Introduction to French Cinema from Its Beginning to the  Present.  This course will introduce students  to the artistic style and the social, historical, and political content of   -cupation, the New Wave, the Cinema du look, and the contemporary  its own techniques and formal principles. Conducted in English. Instruc- L 110 abc. Elementary Spanish.  terms. Grammar fundamentals and their use in understanding, speak- - L 112 abc. Intermediate Spanish.  terms. Prerequisite: L 110 abc or equivalent.  Grammar review, vocabu -lary building, practice in conversation, and introduction to relevant his - in the second and third terms. Students who have studied Spanish   Garcia. L 114.  Spanish Language Literature and its Film Adaptations.  9 units   -lent. Offered concurrently with Hum 114. This course explores canonical  to the present, through an array of male and female authors and direc-tors from Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Spain.  Conducted in Spanish. Students who write papers in English may enroll requirement. Instructor: Arjona.L 115.  Hispanic Cultures in Film and Literature.    Offered  concurrently with Hum 115. This course introduces students to narrative  Spain from the Civil War to the present. Conducted in Spanish. Students  who write papers in English may enroll in this class as Hum 115, which  offered 2021-2022. L 130 abc. Elementary German.  terms. Grammar fundamentals and their use in aural comprehension,  Languages662speaking, reading, and writing. Students who have had German in  secondary school or college must consult with the instructor before   L 132 abc. Intermediate German.  terms. Prerequisite: L 130 abc or equivalent.  Reading of short stories  -sion of vocabulary, and practice in reading, writing, and conversational    have studied German elsewhere must consult with the instructor before   .L 139. Translation Theory and Practice (Chinese Historical Sources  Seminar). This seminar will introduce students  to the problems and practices of historical translation for academic pur -poses, with a focus on primary materials from Chinese history. Students  will take responsibility for an individual translation project, participate in  seminar discussions and collaborative projects to improve the transla -tions being made, and discuss the philosophical and methodological -    H/L 142. Perspectives on History through Russian Literature.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. L/Hum 150. Japanese Literature in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Read and examine the selected classical Japanese literature and its traditions from 7th to 11th century from the perspectives of women,  anti-heroes, and religions. A comparative analysis is applied to many  comics, and anime to understand how Japanese think, and how Shinto and Buddhism have formed their ways of life, ethics, and concepts of life    L/Hum 151. Japanese Literature in Translation from Medieval to  Pre-modern Japan. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Read and examine the selected Medieval to pre-modern Japanese literature and its traditions from 11th to 18th century from the perspectives of women, anti-heroes,  and religions. A comparative analysis is applied to many genres such as  to understand how Japanese think, and how Shinto, Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism, as well as the social systems, have formed their ways   663 Double Suicide at Amijima.ﬂ  Instructor: Hirai. Not offered 2021-2022. L/Hum 152. Classical French Literature in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course introduces students to French theater and   -  the aesthetics of neoclassical theater, the rise of the novel, historical    -ducted in English, but students may read the French originals.  Instruc-L/VC 153. Refugees and Migrants™ Visual and Textual Representa -tions. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course focuses on the refugees  -tigates how these representations participate in the development and  strengthening of political discourse. Works by authors such as Hannah  Arendt, Antje Ellermann, Achille Mbembe, Martin A. Schain, and Sasha   discussed in class include the historical and economic relationships of  Europe with the refugees and migrants™ countries of origin, the rise of   Union, but also its impact on social peace, in France in particular. This   L/Hum 154. The Modern French Novel in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.L/Hum 154. The Modern French Novel in Translation.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This course introduces students to the French novel of  the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, from the realist masterpieces  - Search of Lost Time. Topics include the literary representation of reality,  -tion, the Third Republic), and the decline of the French nobility. Covers    L/Hum 162. Spanish and Latin American Literature in Translation.  9  This class is an introduction to  the literary masterworks of the Hispanic tradition from the 16th to the 20th  centuries. Readings and discussions are in English, but students may read   L 167. Latin Literature.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: Three  years of high-school Latin. Major works of Latin literature, usually one per  term. No work will be studied more than once in four years and students   Languages664L 170 abc. Introduction to Chinese.   terms. An introductory course in standard Chinese (Mandarin) designed  for students with no previous knowledge of the language. The course  introduces the fundamentals of Chinese, including pronunciation, grammar,  -ing, speaking, reading, and writing. By the end of the three-term sequence,  students will have acquired knowledge of basic rules of grammar and the  ability to converse, read, and write on simple topics of daily life, and will  have command of more than 800 Chinese compounds and 700 characters.   L 171 abc. Elementary Chinese for Heritage Learners.  9 units (3-0-  A streamlined course designed for students who have acquired some  speaking, writing, or reading skills, either from home or school. The  course aims at consolidating and developing the students™ ability in listening, conversation, reading, and writing. By the end of the three- term sequence, students should have command of 2000 Chinese compounds and 1500 characters, and be able to live or work in a Chinese speaking environment. Students who completed L 171 abc can  L 172 abc. Intermediate Chinese.  Prerequisite: L 170 abc or L 171 abc or equivalent.  A course designed to  meet the personal interests and future professional goals of students who  have had one year of elementary modern Chinese. Students will learn new    L 173 ab.  Advanced Chinese.  -  A course designed as a  bridge between language and content courses. It provides the oppor-essays on Chinese culture, stories, and news editorials. Multimedia are included. By the end of L173ab, students should have acquired the basic skills to read and research about Chinese culture and society. Classes  are conducted primarily in Chinese. Instructor: Ming.L 174.  Topics in Masterpieces of Chinese Writing.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: instructor™s permission . Offered concurrently  with Hum 174. Reading and discussion of representative Chinese written work throughout Chinese history, including philosophical texts and liter -ary works in different genres. Students are expected to examine these  works in light of their sociopolitical and historical contexts. Students who write papers in English may enroll in this class as Hum 174, which satis- for credit when the course content changes. Instructor: Ming.L 175. French Conversation.  6 units (3-0-3); third term. Prerequisites: L  102 abc and L 103 abc or equivalent.  665is designed for students planning to attend Ecole Polytechnique. Discus-sion materials and guest lectures will focus on technical language to  prepare students for their classes in math and science. Taught in French.  Enrollment limited to 12. L 175 can be repeated for credit since the content    L 176.  Chinese Conversation. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.     Training in oral expression, pronuncia - for students who have learned one year of Chinese and plan to incorporate  it into their future professional or social lives. News, guest talks and discus-sion forums will be included. Can be repeated for credit as content changes  every year.  Instructor: Ming.H/L 191. Perspectives on History through German Literature.  9 units  (3-0-6). For course description, see History. LAW  Pl/Law 99. Causation and Responsibility.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Philosophy.  MATERIALS SCIENCE MS 78 abc. Senior thesis.  -site: instructor™s permission.   to senior materials science majors. Starting with an open-ended topic,  -neering that includes written and oral reports based upon actual results,   MS 90. Materials Science Laboratory.   -  An introductory laboratory in relation-ships between the structure and properties of materials. Experiments involve materials processing and characterization by X-ray diffraction,  scanning electron microscopy, and optical microscopy. Students will  learn techniques for measuring mechanical and electrical properties of materials, as well as how to optimize these properties through micro-structural and chemical control. Independent projects may be performed  MS 100. Advanced Work in Materials Science.  science will arrange special courses or problems to meet the needs of  students working toward the M.S.    Materials Science666APh/MS 105 abc. States of Matter.   terms. For course description, see Applied Physics.MS 110 abc. Materials Research Lectures.  -ond, third terms.  A seminar course designed to introduce advanced  undergraduates and graduate students to modern research in materials   ChE/ESE/ME/MS 111. Sustainable Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6). For  course description, see Chemical Engineering.MS 115. Fundamentals of Materials Science. term. Prerequisites: Ph 2.  An introduction to the structure and properties   All major classes of materials are covered, including metals, ceram -ics, electronic materials, composites, and polymers. The relationships  between chemical bonding, crystal structure, defects, thermodynamics,  phase equilibria, microstructure, and properties are described. Instruc - MS/ME/MedE 116. Mechanical Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Introduction to the mechanical behavior of solids, empha - and mechanical properties. Elastic, inelastic, and plastic properties of  crystalline and amorphous materials. Relations between stress and   motion and forces on dislocations, strengthening mechanisms in crys -  - microstructure, biological vs. synthetic, shear lag model. Fracture in   MS 121. Laboratory Research Methods in Materials Science.  9 units (1-4-4); second term. Prerequisites: MS 115 or graduate standing.       -ments in their specialty. As the situation permits, students are given a   9 units (0-4-5); third  term. Prerequisites: MS 132, may be taken concurrently.  methods in transmission electron microscopy of inorganic materials   -  2022.667MS 125. Advanced Transmission Electron Microscopy.  9 units (1-6-2); third term. Prerequisite: MS 122.  crystalline defects. Phase contrast imaging. Physical optics approach      MS 131. Structure and Bonding in Materials.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: graduate standing or introductory quantum mechan -ics. Electronic structure and orbitals in atoms. Structure and symmetry    waves. Lattice vibrations and lattice waves. Total energy, entropy, and  Gibbs free energy in solids. Stability criteria. Bonding and electronic  structure in metals, semiconductors, ionic crystals, and transition metal      -requisites: graduate standing or instructor™s permission.  Principles of   disorder, and temperature. Correlation functions in solids, with introduc - MS 133. Kinetic Processes in Materials.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: APh 105 b or ChE/Ch 164, or instructor™s permission.  Kinetic    Coarsening of microstructures. Nonequilibrium processing of materials.   MS 141. Introduction to Computational Methods for Science and  Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: graduate stand -ing or instructor™s permission.  An introduction to basic methods and    and its packages Matplotlib, Numpy and SciPy. Numerical precision and   and integration. Discrete Fourier transforms. Numerical methods for ordi - equations. Introduction to numerical methods for solving linear systems   -sis with NumPy, Pandas and Matplotlib. Students will develop numerical     -ence. 9 units (2-3-4); second term. Prerequisite: Instructor™s permission.   Materials Science668-talline materials but some discussion of single crystal methods is also     - -   MS 150 abc. Topics in Materials Science.   second, third terms.  Content will vary from year to year, but will be at a  level suitable for advanced undergraduate or graduate students. Top -ics are chosen according to the interests of students and faculty. Visiting   MS/ME 161. Imperfections in Crystals. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisite: graduate standing or MS 115.  The relation of lattice defects  to the physical and mechanical properties of crystalline solids. Introduc -tion to point imperfections and their relationships to transport properties  in metallic, covalent, and ionic crystals. Kroeger-Vink notation. Introduc - properties of dislocations. Dislocation reactions and interactions including   collective dislocation behavior and mechanical properties of crystals.  Introduction to computer simulations of dislocations. Grain boundar -ies. The structure and properties of interfaces in solids. Emphasis on  materials science aspects of role of defects in electrical, morphological,   2021-2022.MS/APh 162. Electronic Materials. (3-0-6); second term. -  An overview of the relationships between chemical, structural, and symmetry properties of prominent material systems with optoelec-tronic functionalities. Content will be presented through discussions on synthesis and fabrication approaches, core functionalities, and current research frontiers, with a focus on group IV, III-V, and II-VI semiconduc -tors, oxides, two-dimensional materials, dielectrics and mesoscopic systems. Instructor: Falson.MS/ME 166. Fracture of Brittle Solids. -  The mechanical  response of brittle materials (ceramics, glasses and some network poly-mers) will be treated using classical elasticity, energy criteria, and fracture   -cal behavior will be explored. Transformation toughened systems, large- grain crack-bridging systems, nanostructured ceramics, porous ceramics,  anomalous glasses, and the role of residual stresses will be highlighted.   669MS/APh 171. Inelastic Scattering of Materials, Molecules, and  Condensed Matter.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Prerequisites: EE/APh  131 or MS 132 or equivalent. Review of Patterson function and memory function for space or time correlations. Van Hove function for corre -lated dynamics in space and time, especially for materials with thermal energy. Dynamical structure factors for coherent scattering from solids  and liquids. Measurements of energy and momentum of dispersive    -tering and the thermodynamic partition function, transport of thermal  information in coherent inelastic scattering, transition from quantum to   MS 200. Advanced Work in Materials Science.  science will arrange special courses or problems to meet the needs of  advanced graduate students. Ae/AM/MS/ME 213. Mechanics and Materials Aspects of Fracture.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  ME/MS/Ae/AM 224. Multifunctional Materials . 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. For course description, see Mechanical Engineering.APh/MS 256. Computational Solid State Physics and Materials Science. 9 units (3-3-3); third term.  For course description, see Applied Physics.ME/MS 260. Micromechanics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Mechanical Engineering. MS 300. Thesis Research. MATHEMATICS Ma 1 abc. Calculus of One and Several Variables and Linear Alge -bra.  algebra, trigonometry, and calculus.  Special section of Ma 1 a, 12 units   of vector functions, multiple integrals, line and path integrals, theorems   practical. Students will be given information helping them to choose a track at the end of the fall term. There will be a special section or sec -tions of Ma 1 a for those students who, because of their background,  require more calculus than is provided in the regular Ma 1 a sequence.  These students will not learn series in Ma 1 a and will be required to   Mathematics670Ma 1 d. Series. 4 units (2-0-2); second term only. Prerequisites: special  section of Ma 1 a. This is a course intended for those students in the  not be taken by students who have passed the regular Ma 1 a. Instruc -   -uisites: Ma 1 abc. The course is aimed at providing an introduction to   emphasis on equations with well known applications ranging from physics to    -tions, regular singular equations, Laplace transform, and methods for  the study of nonlinear equations (equilibria, stability, predator-prey  Makarov, Angelopoulos. Ma 3/103. Introduction to Probability and Statistics.  9 units (4-0-5); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 1 abc.  Randomness is not anarchy-it  follows mathematical laws that we can understand and use to clarify our knowledge of the universe. This course is an introduction to the   fundamental concepts of probability theory, including distributions and   -tation, the Law of Averages (Laws of Large Numbers), and ﬁthe bell  curveﬂ (Central Limit Theorem). The second half is devoted to statistical   the stochastic mechanisms generating our data? Major themes include   Ma 4/104. Introduction to Mathematical Chaos.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. An introduction to the mathematics of ﬁchaos.ﬂ Period doubling  universality, and related topics; interval maps, symbolic itineraries,   -and real-world problems. Possibly some additional topics, such as Sar -kovski™s theorem, absolutely continuous invariant measures, sensitivity   Ma 5/105 abc. Introduction to Abstract Algebra.  second, third terms.    -rect products and Sylow™s theorem. The second term discusses rings  and modules and includes a proof that principal ideal domains have   671 Ma/CS 6/106 abc. Introduction to Discrete Mathematics.  9 units    -ing graph theory, algorithms, and applications of algebraic structures.   colorings, matchings. Enumeration techniques; formal power series; combinatorial interpretations. Topics from coding and cryptography,      -   Ma 7/107. Number Theory for Beginners. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Some of the fundamental ideas, techniques, and open problems of ba - include Euclidean algorithm, primes, Diophantine equations, including Ma 8. Problem Solving in Calculus.   -site: simultaneous registration in Ma 1 a.  A three-hour per week hands-  Ma 10. Oral Presentation.  Open for credit to  anyone. Freshmen must have instructor™s permission to enroll. In this  course, students will receive training and practice in presenting math -ematical material before an audience. In particular, students will present  material of their own choosing to other members of the class. There  may also be elementary lectures from members of the mathematics   Ma 11. Mathematical Writing.  3 units (0-0-3); third term. Freshmen  must have instructor™s permission to enroll.  Students will work with the instructor and a mentor to write and revise a self-contained paper   to some matters of style and format will be given in a classroom set -  The mentor and the topic are to be selected in consultation with the     Mathematics672FS/Ma 12. Freshman Seminar: The Mathematics of Enzyme Kinet -ics. 6 units (2-0-4); third term.  For course description, see Freshman  Seminars. Ma 13. Problem Solving in Vector Calculus.  2 units (2-0-0); second term. Prerequisites: Concurrent registration in Ph 1b.  A two-hour per week, hands-on class for those students enrolled in Ph 1b need - Demiroglu. Ma 17. How to Solve It. There are many  problems in elementary mathematics that require ingenuity for their  solution. This is a seminar-type course on problem solving in areas of  mathematics where little theoretical knowledge is required. Students will  work on problems taken from diverse areas of mathematics; there is no  prerequisite and the course is open to freshmen. May be repeated for   Ma 20. Frontiers in Mathematics.   -sites: Open for credit to freshman and sophomores.  Weekly seminar  by a member of the math department or a visitor, to discuss his or her  research at an introductory level. The course aims to introduce students  to research areas in mathematics and help them gain an understanding  Ma 92 abc. Senior Thesis.  Prerequisites: To register, the student must obtain permission of the  mathematics undergraduate representative.  Open only to senior math- research. This research must be supervised by a faculty member. The   follow up on an earlier SURF or independent reading project. Two short    A draft of the written thesis must be completed and distributed to the  term. Ma 97. Research in Mathematics.  Units to be arranged in accordance  with work accomplished. This course is designed to allow students to  -ects. Students registering for more than 6 units of Ma 97 must submit a   to the undergraduate option rep at the end of the term. Approval from  the research supervisor and student™s adviser must be granted prior to   Ma 98. Independent Reading. 3Œ6 units by arrangement. Occasion- 673potential supervisor. Topics, hours, and units by arrangement. Graded  Ma 108 abc. Classical Analysis.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 1 or equivalent, or instructor™s permission. May  be taken concurrently with Ma 109.   -   Karpukhin. Ma 109 abc. Introduction to Geometry and Topology.  9 units (3-0-6);  must be taken previously or concurrently.  topology, and an introduction to geometric and algebraic methods in    -  Ma 110 abc. Analysis.  Prerequisites: Ma 108 or previous exposure to metric space topology,  Lebesgue measure.   - theory, measures as functionals, product measures, L^p -spaces, Baire  category, Hahn- Banach theorem, Alaoglu™s theorem, Krein-Millman  theorem, countably normed spaces, tempered distributions and the  -tions, conformal maps and fractional linear transformations, idea of and products, entire and meromorphic functions, elliptic functions. Third     of H^p -spaces and boundary values of analytic functions. Operator orthogonal polynomials, the spectral theorem for bounded operators.  Karpukhin, Rains, Radziwill.Ma 111 abc. Topics in Analysis.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequi -sites: Ma 110 or instructor™s permission.  This course will discuss ad-vanced topics in analysis, which vary from year to year. Topics from pre -vious years include potential theory, bounded analytic functions in the  unit disk, probabilistic and combinatorial methods in analysis, operator     Mathematics674Ma 112 ab. Statistics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ma 2  a probability and statistics or equivalent.  including regression analysis, analysis of variance, and nonparametric  methods. The second term covers permutation methods and the boot-strap, point estimation, Bayes methods, and multistage sampling. Not  Ma 116 abc. Mathematical Logic and Axiomatic Set Theory.  9 units  instructor™s permission.   model theory. The Godel Completeness Theorem and the Complete - categoricity. The Skolem-Lowenheim Theorems. The back and forth  method and Ehrenfeucht-Fraisse games. Farisse theory. Elimination     of set theory, independence and consistency results. Topics in descrip -  Ma/CS 117 abc. Computability Theory.  third terms. Prerequisite: Ma 5 or equivalent, or instructor™s permission.  Various approaches to computability theory, e.g., Turing machines,  recursive functions, Markov algorithms; proof of their equivalence.    problems for groups, solvability of Diophantine equations (Hilbert™s 10th   -ness theorems. Decidable problems, from number theory, algebra,   - Feasible (polynomial time) computations. Polynomial deterministic vs.   Ma 118. Topics in Mathematical Logic: Geometrical Paradoxes.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ma 5 or equivalent, or instruc -tor™s permission.  This course will provide an introduction to the striking   -cussed include geometrical transformations, especially rigid motions; free groups; amenable groups; group actions; equidecomposability and    -   Ma 120 abc. Abstract Algebra.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 5 or equivalent or instructor™s permission.  This 675-theory, Kummer theory, Brauer groups, semisimiple algebras, Weddburn   Ma 121 ab. Combinatorial Analysis.  Prerequisite: Ma 5.  A survey of modern combinatorial mathematics,   Flows in networks with combinatorial applications. Counting, recursion,  and generating functions. Theory of partitions. (0, 1)-matrices. Partially  and codes. Algebraic graph theory, graph embedding, and coloring.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisite: Ma 5 or equivalent.  This course is an introduction to      Ma 124. Elliptic Curves. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ma  5 or equivalent.  -ementary, geometric, and arithmetic points of view. Possible topics are     case treated by Gauss, Lenstra™s factoring algorithm, integral points.   - Ma 125. Algebraic Curves. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ma  5. An elementary introduction to the theory of algebraic curves. Topics   theorem. Possible additional topics would include Riemann surfaces,  branched coverings and monodromy, arithmetic questions, introduction   EE/Ma/CS 126 ab. Information Theory.  terms. For course description, see Electrical Engineering. EE/Ma/CS/IDS 127. Error-Correcting Codes. 9 units (3-0-6) For course description, see Electrical Engineering. Ma 128. Homological Algebra. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequi -sites: Math 120 abc or instructor™s permission.  This course introduces  standard concepts and techniques in homological algebra. Topics will  Mathematics676  sequences; Triangulated categories, and the derived category. Not of - Ma 130 abc. Algebraic Geometry.   terms. Prerequisite: Ma 120 (or Ma 5 plus additional reading).  Plane   schemes, sheaves, general varieties, vector bundles, coherent sheaves,   Ma 132 abc. Topics in Algebraic Geometry.  9 units (3-0-6). Prerequi -sites: Ma 130 or instructor™s permission.  This course will cover advanced  topics in algebraic geometry that will vary from year to year. Topics will  be listed on the math option website prior to the start of classes. Previ-ous topics have included geometric invariant theory, moduli of curves,  logarithmic geometry, Hodge theory, and toric varieties. This course can  be repeated for credit. Not offered 2021Œ22. Ma 135 ab. Arithmetic Geometry.   -uisite: Ma 130. The course deals with aspects of algebraic geometry that have been found useful for number theoretic applications. Topics    theory), curves and Abelian varieties over arithmetic schemes, moduli  EE/Ma/CS/IDS 136. Topics in Information Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Electrical Engineering.Ma/ACM/IDS 140 ab. Probability.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third  terms. Prerequisites: For 140 a, Ma 108 b is strongly recommend -ed. Overview of measure theory. Random walks and the Strong law of  large numbers via the theory of martingales and Markov chains. Char -acteristic functions and the central limit theorem. Poisson process and     9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  Prerequisites: Ma 108; Ma 109  is desirable. - -mal principles, solubility of equations. The method of characteris-Ma 145 abc. Topics in Representation Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term. Prerequisites: Ma 5.  This course will discuss the study of representations of a group (or related algebra) by linear transformations  of a vector space. Topics will vary from year to year, and may include   677 (esp. the symmetric group) and unitary representations (and structure   Ma 147 abc. Dynamical Systems.  Ma 108, Ma 109, or equivalent.   - Ma 148 ab. Topics in Mathematical Physics.  term. This course covers a range of topics in mathematical physics. The content will vary from year to year. Topics covered will include some   -inger equation, spectral theory of unbounded operators, representation    general relativity for mathematicians. Geometric theory of quantum  information and quantum entanglement based on information geometry    second, third terms.    -    - classes, Pontryagin classes, cobordism theory, Chern-Weil theory.  In-Ma 157 abc. Riemannian Geometry.  terms. Prerequisite: Ma 151 or equivalent, or instructor™s permission.  connections, curvature, Bianchi identities, completeness, geodesics,   year to year and may include elements of Morse theory and the calculus of variations, locally symmetric spaces, special geometry, comparison  theorems, relation between curvature and topology, metric functionals   Ma 160 abc. Number Theory.   Prerequisites: Ma 5.  In this course, the basic structures and results  of algebraic number theory will be systematically introduced. Topics    Mathematics678-Ma 162 ab. Topics in Number Theory.  term. Prerequisite: Ma 160.  The course will discuss in detail some  representations, elliptic curves, modular forms, L-functions, special  values, automorphic representations, p-adic theories, theta functions,   Ma 191 abc. Selected Topics in Mathematics.  9 units (3-0-6); first, second, third terms.  covering an area of current research interest. These courses will  be given as sections of 191. Students may register for this course  multiple times even for multiple sections in a single term. The top-ics and instructors for each term and course descriptions will be listed on the math option website each term prior to the start of   Ma 290. Reading. Hours and units by arrangement. Occasionally,  advanced work is given through a reading course under the direction of  an instructor. Ma 390. Research.  Units by arrangement. See also the list of courses in Applied and Computational Mathematics. MECHANICAL ENGINEERINGAdditional advanced courses in the field of mechanical engineering  may be found listed in other engineering options such as aerospace  engineering, applied mechanics, applied physics, control and dynamical  systems, and materials science.  EE/ME 7. Introduction to Mechatronics.  6 units (2-3-1). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.ME 8. Introduction to Robotics.  This course  to robotics, including mobile systems (driving and walking) as well as  manipulators (arms and legs). Robotics needs tools from mechanical  design and fabrication, mathematical analysis of mechanisms, a variety of sensors, programming at all levels, algorithms to interpret visual im -ages, and planners to determine actions. But robots also act in a larger   679  ME 10. Thinking Like an Engineer.  A series of weekly seminars by practicing engineers in industry and academia to introduce  students to principles and techniques useful for Mechanical Engineer- study within Mechanical Engineering. Topics will be presented at an  informal, introductory level. Required for ME undergraduates. Graded  ME 11 abc. Thermal Science.  Prerequisites: Sophomore standing required; ME 12 abc, may be taken  concurrently.  An introduction to classical thermodynamics and transport  with engineering applications. First and second laws; closed and open systems; properties of a pure substance; availability and irreversibility;    -librium; momentum and heat transfer including boundary layers with   ME 12 abc. Mechanics.  Prerequisites: Sophomore standing required; ME 11 abc, may be taken  concurrently.  An introduction to statics and dynamics of rigid bodies,   of virtual work, distributed force systems, friction, static analysis of rigid  and deformable structures, hydrostatics, kinematics, particle dynam -   ME 13/113. Mechanical Prototyping.  summer terms. Enrollment is limited and is based on responses to a   technologies and practices needed to fabricate mechanical prototypes.  Students will acquire the fundamental skills necessary to begin using   to build parametric models of parts and assemblies and learn how  to generate detailed drawings of their designs. Students will also be introduced to manual machining techniques, as well as computer- controlled prototyping technologies, such as three-dimensional printing,  laser cutting, and water jet cutting. Students will receive safety-training,   and hands-on demonstrations of machining and mechanical assem-bly methods. Several prototypes will be constructed using the various  technologies available in the Mechanical Engineering Machine Shop. In-ME 14. Design and Fabrication. 9 units (3-5-1); third term.  Prerequi -sites: ME 12 ab, ME 13. Enrollment is limited and is based on responses  Mechanical Engineering680 mechanical engineering design, fabrication, and visual communication. Principles of mechanical engineering design are taught through a series  of lectures and short group-based design projects with an emphasis on  formal design reviews and team competitions. Course lectures address  the strength properties of engineering materials, statistical descriptions  of stress and strength, design safety factors, static and variable loading  design criteria, engineering case studies, and the design of mechani-cal elements. Group-based projects include formal design reviews and  involve substantial use of the machine shop and maker-space facilities,   ME 23/123. CNC Machining. 4 units (0-4-0); third, summer terms. Pre -requisites: ME 13/113.  Enrollment is limited and is based on responses   computer numerical control machining. Students will learn to create  Gcode and Mcode using Computer-Aided Manufacturing (CAM) soft -ware; they will be instructed on how to safely prepare and operate the  machine™s functions; and will be taught how to implement programmed    of CAM software, machine operation demonstrations, and machining   ME 40. Dimensional and Data Analyses in Engineering. 9 units (3-0- the application of symmetry and dimensional homogeneity (Buckingham Pi theorem) to engineering analysis of systems. The important role of  - -ond part of the course focuses on quantitative data analysis including linear regression, least-squares, principle components, Fourier analysis,   focus is on application to real-world problems encountered by mechani -are discussed. Homework will include implementation of techniques in  ME 50 ab. Experiments and Modeling in Mechanical Engineering. 9 units (0-6-3); second, third terms. Prerequisites: ME 11 abc, ME 12  abc, ME 13, ME 14, and programming skills at the level of ACM 11.  Two-quarter course sequence covers the general theory and methods  - -al procedures are discussed and applied to the analysis of steady-state,  transient, and dynamic problems using a commercial software. CFD  and FEA topics covered include meshing, types of elements, steady and   681drag and lift, static and dynamic mechanical loading, elastic and plastic behavior, and vibrational (modal) analysis. Fluid mechanics labora -   frame combined with digital image correlation (DIC) and strain gage   - ME 72 ab. Engineering Design Laboratory.  (1-8-0) second term. Prerequisites: ME 14.  Enrollment is limited. A proj -ect-based course in which teams of students are challenged to design,   designed by other student teams. The class lectures and team projects  stress the integration of mechanical design, electronics, mechatronics,  engineering analysis, and computation to solve problems in engineering  system design. Critical feedback is provided through a series of formal  design reviews scheduled throughout the ME 72 ab course sequence.   CS/EE/ME 75 abc. Multidisciplinary Systems Engineering. 3 units (2-6-1), or 12 units (2-9-1) second and third terms.  For course descrip-tion, see Computer Science. ME 90 abc. Senior Thesis, Experimental. (0-9-0) second, third terms. Prerequisites: senior status; instructor™s  permission.  faculty member. The topic selection is determined by the adviser and  the student and is subject to approval by the Mechanical Engineering      ME 100. Independent Studies in Mechanical Engineering. Units are  assigned in accordance with work accomplished.  A faculty mentor will oversee a student proposed, independent research or study project   consent of a faculty mentor and a written report is required for each  term of work. Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc. Fluid Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Mechanical Engineering682Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc. Mechanics of Structures and Solids.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. E/ME/MedE 105 ab. Design for Freedom from Disability.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.ME 110. Special Laboratory Work in Mechanical Engineering.  3Œ9 units per term; maximum two terms. -mental research projects may be arranged by members of the faculty to  meet the needs of individual students as appropriate. A written report is   ChE/ESE/ME/MS 111. Sustainable Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6). Four course description, see Chemical Engineering.CE/ME 112 ab. Hydraulic Engineering. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Civil Engineering.ME 115 ab. Introduction to Kinematics and Robotics.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ma 2, ACM 95/100 ab recommend -ed. Introduction to the study of planar, rotational, and spatial motions  with applications to robotics, computers, computer graphics, and me -chanics. Topics in kinematic analysis will include screw theory, rotational   robot kinematics, mobility in mechanisms, and kinematics of open and  closed chain mechanisms. Additional topics in robotics include path  planning for robot manipulators, dynamics and control, and assembly.  Course work will include laboratory demonstrations using simple robot   MS/ME/MedE 116. Mechanical Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Materials Science.ME/EE/EST 117. Energy Technology and Policy.  term. Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc, Ch 1 ab and Ma 1 abc.  Energy technolo -gies and the impact of government policy. Fossil fuels, nuclear power,  and renewables for electricity production and transportation. Resource  models and climate change policies. New and emerging technolo -Ae/ME 118.  Classical Thermodynamics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. ME 119. Heat and Mass Transfer.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Pre -requisites: ME 11 abc, ME 12 abc, ACM 95/100 (may be taken concur -rently).  Transport properties, conservation equations, conduction heat  transfer, convective heat and mass transport in laminar and turbulent   Ae/ME 120. Combustion Fundamentals. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. 683ME/CS/EE 129. Experimental Robotics. 9 units (3-6-0); third  term.  on robotic systems. This includes software infrastructures, e.g., robotic  operating systems (ROS), sensor integration, and implementation on hardware platforms. The ideas developed will be integrated onto robotic   - ME/CS/EE 133 abc. Robotics.  Pre -requisites: ME/CS/EE 129, may be taken concurrently, or with permis -sion of instructor.  The course develops the core concepts of robotics.   kinematic formulations and algorithms for forward and inverse compu -tations, Jacobians, and manipulability. The second quarter transitions   -collision-free motions. The third quarter discusses advanced material,   hands, or autonomous behaviors, or human-robot interactions. The lec -tures will review appropriate analytical techniques and may survey the  current research literature. Course work will focus on an independent    ME/CS/EE 134. Robotic Systems. 9 units (3-6-0); third term.  Prerequi -sites: ME/CS/EE 129, may be taken concurrently, or with permission of  instructor.  This course builds up, and brings to practice, the elements of robotic systems at the intersection of hardware, kinematics and control,  computer vision, and autonomous behaviors. It presents selected topics  from these domains, focusing on their integration into a full sense-think- act robot. The lectures will drive team-based projects, progressing from  building custom robots to writing software and implementing all neces -sary aspects. Working systems will autonomously operate and complete   ME/CE/Ge/ESE 146. Computational Methods for Flow in Porous  Media. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: ME 11abc, ME  12abc, ACM 95/100, ACM 106ab (may be taken concurrently).  This course covers physical, mathematical and simulation aspects of single  -      hydrology, geological CO2 sequestration and induced seismicity, among  Mechanical Engineering684AM/CE/ME 150 abc. Graduate Engineering Seminar.  1 unit; each term. For course description, see Applied Mechanics.Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab. Continuum Mechanics of Fluids and Solids. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. MS/ME 161. Imperfections in Crystals. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Materials Science. Media. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Continuum Mechan -icsŠAe/Ge/ME 160 ab. This course will focus on the physics of porous  materials (e.g., geomaterials, biological tissue) and their intimate    constitutive response of representative porous materials. Emphasis will   AM/ME 165. Finite Elasticity.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Mechanics.MS/ME 166. Fracture of Brittle Solids. 9 units (3-0-6); For course description, see Materials Science.ME/CS/EE 169. Mobile Robots.  -  Mobile robots need to perceive their environment and localize themselves with respect to maps thereof. They further require planners to move along collision- free paths. This course builds up mobile robots in team-based projects,  writing the software from low-level hardware I/O to high level algorithms. track various objectives. Instructor: Niemeyer. CE/ME/Ge 173. Mechanics of Soils. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  For course description, see Civil Engineering.ME/CE/Ge 174. Mechanics of Rocks. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ae/Ge/ME 160a.  Basic principles of deformation, strength, and stressing of rocks. Elastic behavior, plasticity, viscoelastic -ity, viscoplasticity, creep, damage, friction, failure mechanisms, shear   - ESE/ME/EST/Ec/ChE 179. Climate Change Impacts, Mitigation  and Adaptation. 3 units (3-0-0). For course description, see Environ-mental Science and Engineering.685ME 200. Advanced Work in Mechanical Engineering.  A faculty men-tor will oversee a student proposed, independent research or study  project to meet the needs of graduate students.  consent of a faculty mentor and a written report is required for each  term of work. ME 201. Advanced Topics in Mechanical Engineering.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  The faculty will prepare courses on advanced  Andrade.ME 202 abc. Engineering Two-Phase Flows.  9 units (3-0-6). Prerequi -sites: ACM 95/100 ab, Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc, or equivalents. Selected      conventional, nuclear, and geothermal power plants, marine hydrofoils,   Ae/AM/MS/ME 213. Mechanics and Materials Aspects of Fracture.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/AM/CE/ME 214. Computational Solid Mechanics. . For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/AM/ME 215. Dynamic Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/ME/APh 218. Statistical Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. CE/Ge/ME 222. Earthquake Source Processes, Debris Flows, and  Soil Liquefaction: Physics-based Modeling of Failure in Granular  Media. 6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Civil Engineering.Ae/AM/ME 223. Plasticity.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  ME/MS/Ae/AM 224. Multifunctional Materials. 9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: MS 115 or equivalent, Ae/AM/CE/ME 102abc or  APh105abc (may be waived with instructor™s permission).  Multiscale  Electronic aspects and multiferroic materials; Symmetry breaking phase   -  Mechanical Engineering686Ae/AM/ME/Ge 225. Special Topics in Solid Mechanics.  Units to be arranged. For course description, see Aerospace.  Ae/ACM/ME 232 ab. Computational Fluid Dynamics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace.  ME/CDS/EE 234 ab. Advanced Robotics. 9 units (3-3-3); second, third terms.  focuses on advanced robot kinematics and mechanisms. Topics include  a Lie Algebraic viewpoint on kinematics and robot dynamics, a review  of robotic mechanisms, and topics in robotic grasping and manipulation. The second quarter focuses on advanced topics in robotic motion plan-ning and navigation, including planning with POMDPs, robotic coverage planning, and multi-robot coordination. Course work will consist of home-works, programming projects, and labs. Instructor: Burdick.Ae/CDS/ME 251 ab. Closed Loop Flow Control.  9 units; (3-0-6 a, 1-3-5 b). For course description, see Aerospace. AM/CE/ME 252. Linear and Nonlinear Waves in Structured Media.  9 units (2-1-6). For course description, see Applied Mechanics.ME/MS 260. Micromechanics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites:  ACM 95/100 or equivalent, and Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc or Ae/Ge/ME 160 ab or instructor™s permission.  The course gives a broad overview of   -nection to molecular structure, and its consequences on macroscopic  properties. Topics include phase transformations in crystalline solids, in -  defects, including dislocations, surface steps, and domain walls; thin   materials, mechanical properties, and materials design. Open to under - Ae/AM/CE/ME/Ge 265 ab. Static and Dynamic Failure of Brittle  Solids and Interfaces, from the Micro to the Mega.  9 units; (3-0-6). For course description, see Aerospace. ME/Ge/Ae 266 ab. Dynamic Fracture and Frictional Faulting.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ae/AM/CE/ME 102 abc or Ae/Ge/ME  160 ab or instructor™s permission.  Introduction to elastodynamics and  waves in solids. Dynamic fracture theory, energy concepts, cohesive  rupture of frictional interfaces. Radiation from moving cracks. Thermal   -ing along nonplanar interfaces. Related dynamic phenomena, such as 687ME 300. Research in Mechanical Engineering.  Hours and units by ar-rangement.  - are directed in research. MEDICAL ENGINEERINGMedE 99. Undergraduate Research in Medical Engineering.  Vari -third terms.  Undergraduate research with a written report at the end of  each term; supervised by a Caltech faculty member, or co-advised by   MedE 100 abc. Medical Engineering Seminar.  third terms.  All PhD degree candidates in Medical Engineering are re -quired to attend all MedE seminars. If there is no MedE seminar during a  week, then the students should go to any other graduate-level seminar that week. Students should broaden their knowledge of the engineering   to learn the forefronts of the research and development of medical ma -terials, technologies, devices and systems from the seminars. Graded   MedE 101. Introduction to Clinical Physiology and Pathophysiology  for Engineers. 9 units (3-0-6); First term. Prerequisites: No Prerequi -sites, Bi 1 or equivalent recommended.  The goal of this course is to  a special emphasis on the clinical relevance. The design of the course is   - -lenges and research highlighting diagnostic and therapeutic modalities.    ultimately seeks to promote a bridge between relevant clinical problems   E/ME/MedE 105 ab. Design for Freedom from Disability.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.ChE/BE/MedE 112. Creativity and Technological Innovation with   9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.EE/MedE 114 ab. Analog Circuits Design.  12 units (4-0-8). For course description, see Electrical Engineering. Medical Engineering688EE/MedE 115. Micro-/Nano-scales Electro-optics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.MS/ME/MedE 116. Mechanical Behavior of Materials. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Materials Science.EE/MedE 124. Mixed-mode Integrated Circuits.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Electrical Engineering.EE/CS/MedE 125. Digital Electronics and Design with FPGAs and  VHDL. 9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see Electrical Engineer-ing.MedE/EE/BE 168 abc. Biomedical Optics: Principles and Imaging. 9 units (4-0-5) each; parts a and b are taught in second and third terms  in odd academic years, and part c is taught in second term in even academic years.  principles of optical photon transport in biological tissue. Topics include  a brief introduction to biomedical optics, single-scatterer theories,  Monte Carlo modeling of photon transport, convolution for broad-beam   - and spectroscopy, (absorption, elastic scattering, Raman scattering,   -gies. Topics include ballistic imaging (confocal microscopy, two-photon  microscopy, super-resolution microscopy, etc.), optical coherence   tomography. Part c covers emerging optical imaging technologies. Top -ics include photoacoustic tomography, ultrasound-modulated optical     EE/CS/MedE 175. Digital Circuits Analysis and Design with Complete  VHDL and RTL Approach.  9 units (3-6-0). For course description, see  Electrical Engineering.EE/BE/MedE 185. MEMS Technology and Devices.  9 units (3-0-6). For  course description, see Electrical Engineering.EE/MedE 187. VLSI and ULSI Technology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course  description, see Electrical Engineering.ChE/BE/MedE 188. Molecular Imaging. 9 units (3-0-6). For course  description, see Chemical Engineering.BE/EE/MedE 189 ab. Design and Construction of Biodevices. 189 a, 12 units (3-6-3); 189b, 9 units (0-9-0). For course description, see Bioengineering.689MedE 199. Special Topics in Medical Engineering.  Units to be ar-ranged, terms to be arranged. Subject matter will change from term to   on the understanding and applying engineering for medical problems.  MedE 201 ab. Principles and Design of Medical Devices. 9 units (3-0-6); second and third term.  Prerequisites: instructor™s permission.  This course provides a broad coverage on the frontiers of medical diagnostic  and therapeutic technologies and devices based on multidisciplinary engineering principles. 201a topics include FDA regulations, in vitro  diagnostics, biosensors, electrograms, medical imaging technologies,  medical implants, nanomedicine, cardiovascular engineering & technol -ogy, medical electronics, wireless communications through the skin and   - biomaterials, implants and foreign body reaction, medical electronics,     fundamentals of biology, chemistry, engineering, physics, and materi -  201b-Tai. MedE 202. Sensors in Medicine. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prereq -uisites: None. Sensors play a very important role in all aspect of modern  life. This course is an essential introduction to a variety of physical,  chemical and biological sensors that are used in medicine and healthcare.  The fundamental recognition mechanisms, transduction principles and  materials considerations for designing powerful sensing and biosens-ing devices will be covered. We will also discuss the development of  emerging electronic-skin, wearable and soft electronics toward personal - for novel sensing technologies to address the current medical needs.   MedE 205. New Frontiers in Medical Technologies.  6 units (2-0-4);  third term. Prerequisites: None but knowledge of semiconductor physics  and some system engineering, basic electrical engineering highly recom -mended. New Frontiers of Medical Technologies is an introductory gradu -ate level course that describes space technologies, instruments, and en-gineering techniques with current and potential applications in medicine.  These technologies have been originally and mainly developed for space   proven with various degrees of success and maturity. This class intro -duces these topics, the basics of the technologies, their intended original  space applications, and the medical applications. Topics include but are  Medical Engineering690 - MedE/BE/Ae 243. Physiological Mechanics. 9 units (3-0-6); second  term. Prerequisites: Ae/APh/CE/ME 101 abc or equivalent or ChE 103  a.   transport across membranes and endothelial layers. Fluid mechanics of  the respiratory system. Renal circulation and circulatory system. Biologi -MedE/EE 268. Medical Imaging. 9 units (4-0-5); third term.  Medical imaging technologies will be covered. Topics include X-ray radiography,  X-ray computed tomography (CT), nuclear imaging (PET & SPECT),  ultrasonic imaging, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  Instructor: Wang. MedE 291. Research in Medical Engineering.  Units to be arranged,     MUSICMu 51. Understanding Music. The Listen- -cal forms, genres, and styles. Course is intended for musicians as well  as nonmusicians and is strongly recommended as an introduction to   Mu 55. The Great Orchestras: Their History, Conductors and  Repertoire.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  This survey course will trace the symphony orchestra from its origins in the mid eighteenth century to the  present day. Special emphasis will be given to the great civic orchestras  of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, their conductors, and core  orchestral repertoire. Making use of historic audio and video recordings  from the twentieth century, along with more recent documentary record -   Mu 56. Jazz History.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will    Johnson, Jelly Roll Morton, Louis Armstrong, Benny Goodman, Duke   691 2021-2022.Mu 57. Fundamentals of Music Theory and Elementary Ear Train -ing. Basic vocabulary and concepts of music theory (rhythm and pitch notation, intervals, scales, function of key sig-natures, etc.); development of aural perception via elementary rhythmic   M.Mu 58. Harmony I. 9 units (3-0-6), second term. Prerequisite: Mu 57 or  entrance exam. Study of tonal harmony and intermediate music theory; techniques of chord progression, modulation, and melody writing ac - M.Mu 59. Harmony II. 9 units (3-0-6), third term. Prerequisite: Mu 58 or  entrance exam. More advanced concepts of music theory, including  chromatic harmony, and 20th-century procedures relating to selected   Mu 137. History I: Music History to 1750. The course traces the history of music from ancient Greece to the time  of Bach and Handel. A survey of the contributions by composers such as Machaut, Josquin, and Palestrina will lead to a more in-depth look  at the music of Monteverdi, Purcell, Corelli, Vivaldi, and the two most   Brown, M. Mu 138. History II: Music History from 1750 to 1850.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Music composed between 1750 and 1850 is among the most popular concert music of today and the most recorded music in  the classical tradition. This course will focus on developments in Eu-ropean music during this critical period. An in-depth look at the music  composers immediately preceding and following them (the Bach sons,  M.Mu 139. History III: Music History from 1850 to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  From the end of the 19th century to the present day,  classical music has undergone the fastest and most radical changes in   of various musical styles, compositional methods, and music technolo-  Music692NEUROBIOLOGYNB/Bi/CNS 150. Introduction to Neuroscience.  10 units (4-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Bi 8, 9, or instructor™s permission.  General principles  overview of the subject and a foundation for advanced courses. Topics  include the physical and chemical bases for action potentials, synap-tic transmission, and sensory transduction; anatomy; development; sensory and motor pathways; memory and learning at the molecular,  cellular, and systems level; and the neuroscience of brain diseases. Let - NB/Bi/CNS 152. Neural Circuits and Physiology of Appetite and  Body Homeostasis. -ate standing or NB/Bi/CNS 150An advanced course of lectures, readings, and student presentations focusing on neural basis of appetites such as hunger and thirst. This course will cover the  mechanisms that control appetites both at peripheral and central level. These include genetics, neural manipulation, and viral tracing tools with particular emphasis on the logic of how the body and the brain cooperate to maintain homeostasis. Given in alternate years; Not offered 2021- 2022. Instructor: Oka.NB/Bi/CNS 154. Principles of Neuroscience. NB/Bi/CNS 150  This course aims to distill the fundamental tenets of brain science, unlike the voluminous textbook with a similar title. What are the essential facts and ways of un-reading will touch on a broad range of phenomena from evolution, de-velopment, biophysics, computation, behavior, and psychology. Students  in alternate years; Not offered 2021-2022.  Instructor: Meister. NB/Bi/BE 155. Neuropharmacology.  -NB/Bi/CNS 150. The neuroscience of drugs for therapy,  for prevention, and for recreation. Students learn the prospects for new generations of medications in neurology, psychiatry, aging, and  treatment of substance abuse. Topics: Types of drug molecules, Drug  receptors, Electrophysiology, Drugs activate ion channels, Drugs block  ion channels, Drugs activate and block G protein pathways, Drugs block neurotransmitter transporters, Pharmacokinetics, Recreational drugs, Nicotine Addiction, Opiate Addiction, Drugs for neurodegenerative dis - migraine, and Psychiatric diseases: Nosology and drugs. The course is  taught at the research level. Given in alternate years; Not offered 2021- 2022. Instructor: Lester. NB/Bi/CNS 157. Comparative Nervous Systems.    An introduction 693to the comparative study of the gross and microscopic structure of nervous systems. Emphasis on the vertebrate nervous system; also, the highly developed central nervous systems found in arthropods and cephalopods. Variation in nervous system structure with function and  with behavioral and ecological specializations and the evolution of the vertebrate brain. Letter grades only. Given in alternate years; Not offered  2021-2022. Instructor: Allman.Pl/CNS/NB/Bi/Psy 161. Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Philosophy. NB/Bi/CNS 162. Cellular and Systems Neuroscience Laboratory.   permission.  used for electrophysiological studies of the central nervous system.  Through the term, students investigate the physiological response prop - intracellular recording techniques. Students are instructed in all aspects   electrode fabrication, and data analysis. The class also includes a brain    NB/Bi/CNS 163. The Biological Basis of Neural Disorders.  6 units (3-0-3); second term. Prerequisites: NB/Bi/CNS 150 or instructor™s per -mission. The neuroscience of psychiatric, neurological, and neurode -generative disorders and of substance abuse, in humans and in animal  models. Students master the biological principles including genetics, cell biology, biochemistry, physiology, and circuits. Topics are taught  at the research level and include classical and emerging therapeutic    NB/Bi/CNS 164. Tools of Neurobiology.   -requisites: NB/Bi/CNS 150 or equivalent.  methods and approaches to understanding in modern neurobiology.  The focus is on understanding the tools of the discipline, and their use  genetics, disease models, transgenic and knock-in technology, virus   optogenetics, optical and electrical recording, neural coding, quantita -  CNS/Bi/Psy/NB 176. Cognition. 9 units (4-0-5); third term.  For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.Bi/CNS/NB 184. The Primate Visual System.  9 units (3-1-5). For course description, see Biology. Bi/CNS/NB 185. Large Scale Brain Networks.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Biology. Neurobiology 694CNS/Bi/EE/CS/NB 186. Vision: From Computational Theory to  Neuronal Mechanisms.  12 units (4-4-4). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187. Neural Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems.Bi/CNS/NB 195. Mathematics in Biology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Biology. BE/Bi/CNS/NB 197. Mentoring and Outreach.  Units to be arranged, up to 12 units per year; taken in any term. For course description, see Bioengineering. BE/Bi/NB 203. Introduction to Programming for the Biological Sci -ences Bootcamp. 6 units. For course description, see Bioengineering.NB/Bi/CNS 216. Behavior of Mammals.  A course of lectures, readings, and discussions focused on the genetic, physiological, and ecological bases of behavior in mammals. A basic  knowledge of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology is desirable. Given in alternate years. Offered 2021-2022.  Instructor: Allman .NB/Bi/CNS 217. Central Mechanisms in Perception.  Reading and discussions of behavioral and electrophysi-ological studies of the systems for the processing of sensory information in the brain. Given in alternate years. Not offered 2021-2022.  Instructor: Allman.NB/Bi/CNS 220. Genetic Dissection of Neural Circuit Function. 6  NB/Bi/CNS 150 Open to advanced (junior or senior) undergraduates only and with instructor permission. This advanced course will discuss the emerging genetic tools. These include optogenetic and pharmacogenetic manipu -lations of neuronal activity, genetically based tracing of neuronal con -nectivity, and genetically based indicators of neuronal activity. Both viral  and transgenic approaches will be covered, and examples will be drawn from both the invertebrate and vertebrate literature. Interested CNS or other graduate students who have little or no familiarity with molecular biology will be supplied with the necessary background information. Lectures and student presentations from the current literature. Instructor: Anderson.Bi/CNS/BE/NB 230. Optogenetic and CLARITY Methods in Experi-mental Neuroscience.  9 units (3-2-4). For course description, see Biology. Bi/BE/CNS/NB 241. Spatial Genomics. For course description, see Biology.  695CNS/Bi/NB 247. Cerebral Cortex.  6 units (2-0-4). For course descrip-tion, see Computation and Neural Systems.NB/Bi/CNS 250 c. Topics in Systems Neuroscience.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The class focuses on quantitative studies of problems in systems neuroscience. Students will  the ionic basis of the action potential, and will move from the study of interacting currents within neurons to the study of systems of interact-ing neurons. Topics will include lateral inhibition, mechanisms of motion  tuning, local learning rules and their consequences for network structure and dynamics, oscillatory dynamics and synchronization across brain circuits, and formation and computational properties of topographic neural maps. The course will combine lectures and discussions, in which  students and faculty will examine papers on systems neuroscience, usu-ally combining experimental and theoretical/modeling components. In-structor: Siapas.CNS/Bi/NB 256. Decision Making. 6 units (2-0-4). For course descrip-tion, see Computation and Neural Systems.NB 299. Graduate Research.   terms. Students may register for research units after consultation with  their adviser. PERFORMING AND VISUAL ARTS Courses under this heading cover the instructional content of a range of  fail only. The units count toward the total unit requirement for gradua -tion, but they do not count toward the 108-unit requirement in humani -ties and social sciences. PVA 30 abc. Guitar.     -   PVA 31 abc. Chamber Music.   Study and performance of music for instrumental ensembles of two to eight members, and for piano four-hands. Literature ranges from the  16th to 21st centuries. Open to students who play string, woodwind, brass instruments, guitar, or piano. After auditioning, pianists will be   Jasper White, Ward, Chalifour, Elgart. Performing and Visual Arts 696PVA 32 abc. Symphony Orchestra.  third terms.  Study and performance of music written for full symphony orchestra and chamber orchestra. The orchestra performs both the  standard symphonic repertoire and contemporary music. Two and a half   PVA 33 abc. Wind Orchestra.     and performs three programs per year (one per term) at Ramo Audito -rium and other Los Angeles venues. Repertoire consists of traditional  and contemporary music encompassing a wide variety of styles, and regularly features renowned guest artists. Open to students of all levels   PVA 34 abc. Jazz Band/Jazz Improvisation.  -ond, third terms.  from Duke Ellington to Maria Schneider, with additional opportunity for  the study of improvisation. Class meets one evening per week.Instruc -PVA 35 abc.  Glee Club.  Prep -aration and performance of choral repertoire spanning a range of  historical periods and musical styles. Includes occasional collaborative   PVA 37 abc.  Chamber Singers.  terms. Advanced study and performance of SATB choral music. Em - accompanied. Includes performances with the Glee Clubs as well as at other on-campus events. Audition required. Participation in Glee Clubs   PVA 40 a.  Find Your Stories.  Through a series    changing 21st century global landscape. The class culminates in public   PVA 40 b.  Moth to the Flame. second   science and democracy in open forums. Lecturers from other Divisions  will discuss their own history of public speaking and share their process  - 697PVA 40 c.  Long Form Storytelling. third   -vious terms and weaves them into a long-form storytelling narrative for a live invited audience at the conclusion. Students receive public speak -   PVA 41 abc. Storytelling for Scientists.  third terms.     and perform new narratives for the ever-changing 21st century global    PVA 42 abc. Improvisation for Scientists.  third terms.  This class is taught sequentially over the academic year and begins with rudimentary improvisation techniques, and continues   improvisation, and advanced techniques with monthly public perfor - PVA 61 abc.  Silkscreen and Silk Painting.  third terms.  Instruction in silkscreening techniques, primarily for T-shirts.   Barry. PVA 62 abc.  Drawing and Painting.  terms. Instruction in techniques of painting in acrylics and watercolor  and life drawing of models. Emphasis on student-chosen subject with a   PVA 63 abc.  Ceramics.  In-struction in the techniques of creating ceramics, including the slab roller   PHILOSOPHYHum/Pl 39. Ancient Greek Philosophy.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Humanities.Hum/Pl 40. Right and Wrong.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities. Hum/Pl 41. Knowledge and Reality.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities. Philosophy698Hum/Pl 43. Meaning In Life. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/Pl 44. Philosophy Through Science Fiction.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/Pl 45. Ethics & AI. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/Pl 46. Thinking about Climate Change. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Humanities.Pl 90 ab. Senior Thesis. 9 units (1-0-8). Required of students taking  the philosophy option. To be taken in any two consecutive terms of the   words on a philosophical topic to be determined in consultation with  their thesis adviser. Limited to students taking the philosophy option.  Pl 98. Reading in Philosophy.  9 units (1-0-8). Prerequisite: instructor™s  permission. An individual program of directed reading in philosophy, in   Pl/Law 99. Causation and Responsibility.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.   of causation, moral responsibility, and legal liability. It will consider legal  doctrines of causation and responsibility, as well as attempts within  philosophy to articulate these concepts. Questions to be addressed   do not cause? Is it worse to cause some harm, than to unsuccessfully  than those who attempt harm? When, if ever, can the ends justify the  means? What constitutes negligence? Is it worse to cause some harm, than to allow it to happen (when you could have prevented it)? Instruc -Pl 100. Free Will.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. the question of what it means to have free will, whether and why free  will is desirable, and whether humans have free will. Topics may include  historical discussions of free will from writers such as Aristotle, Bo --tic, and whether determinism is compatible with free will; the connection  between free will and moral responsibility; the relationship between free  will and the notion of the self; beliefs about free will; the psychology of    Pl 102. Selected Topics in Philosophy.   announcement. Prerequisite: Hum/Pl 40 or Hum/Pl 41 or instructor™s  permission.699HPS/Pl/CS 110. Causation and Explanation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/Pl 120. Introduction to Philosophy of Science.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/Pl 122. Probability, Evidence, and Belief.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science. HPS/Pl 123. Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics.  9 units (3-0-6); For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/Pl 124. Philosophy of Space and Time. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science. HPS/Pl 125. Philosophical Issues in Quantum Physics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science. HPS/Pl 128. Philosophy of Mathematics. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science. HPS/Pl 136. Happiness and the Good Life. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/Pl 138. Human Nature and Society.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.HPS/Pl 139. Human Nature, Welfare, & Sustainability.  9 units (3-0-For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.Pl/CNS/NB/Bi/Psy 161. Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: None, but strongly suggest prior background in philoso -phy of mind and basic neurobiology (such as Bi150).  One of the last great challenges to our understanding of the world concerns conscious  how does it connect with the rest of our science? This course will cover  philosophy of mind, cognitive psychology, and cognitive neuroscience     and students with such background will be preferentially considered.   HPS/Pl 165. Selected Topics in Philosophy of Science.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History and Philosophy of Science.Pl 185. Moral Philosophy.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A survey of topics in moral philosophy. The emphasis will be on metaethical issues, al -though some normative questions may be addressed. Metaethical top - Philosophy700right and wrong (consequentialism, deontological theories, rights-based  ethical theories, virtue ethics); the status of moral judgments (cognitiv-ism vs. noncognitivism, realism vs. irrealism); morality and psychology;  moral relativism; moral skepticism; morality and self-interest; the nature  of justice. The implications of these theories for various practical moral  2022.PHYSICAL EDUCATION PE 1. Wellness.   An introductory sur-vey course of important topics of physical, mental and overall health and  include basic principles and components of exercise and physical con-ditioning, the role of sleep and nutrition in overall health, time and stress management skills, emotional and mental self and community care principals. The course will be team taught by members of the physical  education department in collaboration with other student affairs partners  and resources. Instructor: Staff. PE 2. Student Designed Fitness.  -ment. This course provides students with knowledge and practical opportunities to develop and implement an individualized program to are developed during week two of the term, and journals are maintained throughout the term to monitor progress. May only be used for 3 units of the 9-unit physical education requirement. PE 3. Hiking.  This course is de- Pasadena and the San Gabriel Mountains while participating in physical  plans, and how to research trails in the local area. The class will meet on  campus and then travel to one of the local trails for an afternoon hike.  Students will be asked to use maps, compass, and GPS devices on various hikes to teach them proper use of all forms of location guid -vegetation, learn trail etiquette, discuss survival scenarios in the event   -tion and hydration will be presented, and students will create a search  and rescue plans in the event of an overnight emergency. This class will    PE 4. Introduction to Power Walking.   -ment.   701PE 5. Beginning Running.  Students will learn fundamental principles of sound running training to help with  short-term and long-term improvement. The course will cover workout  design, running mechanics, injury prevention and other related topics.  levels, from beginner to intermediate. Course assessments will include   PE 6. Core Training, Beginning/Intermediate.   announcement.  training techniques that focus on working deep muscles of the entire     PE 7. Speed and Agility Training, Beginning/Intermediate.  3 units;  with targeted exercises designed to help the student increase these  areas for use in competitive situations.  Instruction will focus on increas -ing foot speed, leg turnover, sprint endurance, and competitive balance.   PE 8. Fitness Training, Beginning.     training, core training, walking, aerobics, yoga, swimming, and cycling.   PE 9. Soccer.   Fundamental instruc-plays, defensive strategies, and goal keeping. Course includes competi-PE 10. Aerobic Dance.   Each class includes a thorough warm-up, a cardiovascular workout phase that     PE 14. Basketball Skills, Beginning and Intermediate.  by announcement. Features fundamental instruction on shooting, drib - PE 20. Fencing, Beginning.  -ning fencing includes basic techniques of attack, defense, and counter- Physical Education702Lecture topics include fencing history, strategy, scouting and  PE 24. Yoga, Beginning.    is a system of physical postures designed to stretch and strengthen the  body, calm the nervous system, and center the mind. It is a noncompet -itive activity designed to reduce stress for improved health of body and    PE 27. Frisbee Golf.  This course is designed to provide students an opportunity to learn various disc golf  shots (driving, mid-range, putting), strategies, rules, and etiquette. Class time will be used practicing on campus and playing the game at various local courses. Students will develop the knowledge and ability to play  PE 29. Outdoor Lawn Games.  Tube Water Polo, Dodgeball, Bocce, Corn Hole, Flag Football) and learn  learning how to compete in cooperative team games. Course require - trying something new while working on your coordination and general  PE 30. Golf, Beginning and Intermediate.  -nouncement. Beginning course covers fundamentals of the game, in-cluding rules, terminology, etiquette, basic grip, set-up, swing, and club   (irons and woods), chip, pitch, sand, and putting. Intermediate course  will focus on swing development of specialty shots and on course play PE 31. Indoor/Outdoor Cycling.    components of cardio-respiratory endurance, muscular strength and   and helmet however equipment will be provided as needed. Please see   PE 33. Beginning Triathlon Training.   -ment. This course is designed to help beginners learn to train for a   technique instruction in each area. Students will learn how to develop  a training schedule, choosing the correct event for their skill, nutri -tion, safety, and race preparation. The course will include techniques   strategies to record a personal best in future races. Safe training to  703reduce injury and assure a healthy race is the foundation of this course.  PE 35. Diving, Beginning/Intermediate.  -ment. Students will learn fundamentals of springboard diving to include   instruction in the back somersault, forward somersault, forward somer - PE 36. Swimming, Beginning and Intermediate.  announcement. Instruction in all basic swimming strokes, including  freestyle, elementary backstroke, racing backstroke, breaststroke, side - PE 38. Water Polo.   Basic recreation -al water polo with instruction of individual skills and team strategies. A  PE 40. Beginning Self Defense.  Students will learn basics of keeping themselves safe when an unknown  person threatens their safety. The course is focused on staying safe  while rendering an assailant temporarily unable to give chase to allow  the student to get help. Techniques taught will assist students in learn -ing vulnerable targets to disable an attacker, using their own body to  force. Using an assailant™s attack against him to maintain balance and  administer the greatest degree of force necessary to disable a threat is  PE 44. Karate (Shotokan), Beginning and Intermediate/Advanced. 3  Fundamental self-defense techniques including form practice and realistic sparring. Emphasis on improving  muscle tone, stamina, balance, and coordination, with the additional   PE 48. T™ai-Chi Ch™uan, Beginning and Intermediate.  by announcement.    PE 50. Badminton, Beginning/Intermediate.  announcement. Basic skills will be taught, including grips, services, overhead and underhand strokes, and footwork. Rules, terminology, and  etiquette are covered. Intermediate skills such as drives, serve returns,  forehand and backhand smash returns, attacking clears, and sliced  drop shots are taught. Singles and doubles play along with drill work   PE 54. Racquetball, Beginning and Intermediate.  announcement. -Physical Education704ing rules, scoring, strategy, and winning shots. All types of serves will be    PE 56. Squash, Beginning, Intermediate, Advanced. 3 units; of-fered by announcement.  Learn by playing as basic rules and strokes  are taught. Fundamentals to include proper grip, stroke, stance, and  positioning, along with serve and return of serve. Intermediate and  Advanced course will concentrate on skill development with inclusion of forehand and backhand drives, lobs, volleys, and drops, with emphasis  PE 60. Tennis, Beginning and Intermediate.   -nouncement. Stroke fundamentals, singles and doubles play, plus rules,  terminology, and etiquette are covered in all classes. Beginning course   -mediate course is for those players between levels and will concentrate on strategy, drills, and match play. Intermediate level focuses on im -proving technique, footwork, and court positioning, with instruction on   PE 70. Weight Training, Beginning/Intermediate.   by announcement. Active participation in a strength and conditioning   enlighten students on various methods, terminology, and techniques in   PE 71. Advanced Techniques of Human Performance.   by announcement. Prerequisites: PE 70, instructor approval.  This course  addressing components including muscular strength, foot speed, agility,   PE 77. Volleyball, Beginning and Intermediate.   announcement. Fundamental instruction on drills, strategies, and rules, with game-playing opportunities. Basics of serve, pass, set, spike, defense, and court position will be taught. Intermediate level focuses on skill development to a more competitive standard and features multiple  PE 81. Bouldering.  Taught at the  Caltech bouldering cave, Brown Gym. During this introductory course   harness, set-up and use a tubular belay device, and belay commands.    705PE 82. Rock Climbing, Beginning/Intermediate.  announcement. Taught at the Caltech Climbing Wall, Brown Gym. Basic   while learning to climb safely. Use of climbing rope and other equipment   PE 84. Table Tennis, Beginning/Intermediate.   announcement. Introductory course to provide general knowledge of  equipment, rules, and basic strokes, including topspin drive, back -spin chop, and simple block in both forehand and backhand. Multiball   regulations for international competition and fundamentals of winning  table tennis, including footwork drills, smash, serve, and attack. Instruc-Intercollegiate Teams  PE 85 ab. Intercollegiate Track and Field Teams.  3 units; second, third terms.  PE 87 ab. Intercollegiate Swimming and Diving Teams.  second terms. PE 90 abc. Intercollegiate Water Polo Teams.  third terms.  PE 91 ab. Intercollegiate Basketball Teams.  terms.  PE 92. Intercollegiate Soccer Teams.  Gillis, Gould.PE 93 ab. Intercollegiate Baseball Team.  3 units; second, third terms.  PE 95 ab. Intercollegiate Tennis Teams.  3 units; second, third terms.  PE 97. Intercollegiate Cross-Country Teams.  PE 99. Intercollegiate Volleyball Team.  Gardner. Physical Education706PHYSICS Ph 1 abc. Classical Mechanics and Electromagnetism.  9 units (4-0-  - in Ph 1 a; electricity and magnetism, and special relativity, in Ph 1 b, c.  Emphasis on physical insight and problem solving. Ph 1 b, c is divided   and the Analytic Track, which teaches and uses methods of multivari -able calculus. Students enrolled in the Practical Track are encouraged  to take Ph 8 bc concurrently. Students will be given information helping  Hsieh, Refael, Cissé. Ph 2 abc. Waves, Quantum Mechanics, and Statistical Physics.  9  abc. An introduction to several areas of physics including applications in  modern science and engineering. Topics include discrete and continu -ous oscillatory systems, wave mechanics, applications in telecommuni- quantum harmonic oscillator, the Hydrogen atom, applications in optical  and semiconductor systems (second term); ensembles and statistical systems, thermodynamic laws, applications in energy technology and  other areas (third term). Although best taken in sequence, the three   Ph 3. Introductory Physics Laboratory.  third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 1 a or instructor™s permission.  Introduction   ion trapping, harmonic motion, mechanical resonance, and precision  interferometry. Broader skills covered include introductions to essential  electronic equipment used in modern research labs, basic digital data  acquisition and analysis, statistical interpretation of quantitative data,   -search, and an introduction to the Mathematica programming language.   FS/Ph 4. Freshman Seminar: Astrophysics and Cosmology with  Open Data. 6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see Freshman  Seminar. Ph 5. Analog Electronics for Physicists.  Prerequisites: Ph1abc, Ma1abc, Ma2 taken concurrently.  A fast-paced laboratory course covering the design, construction, and testing of practical analog and interface circuits, with emphasis on applications of   Basic linear and nonlinear elements and circuits are studied, including   707The course culminates in a two-week project of the student™s choosing.   Ph 6. Physics Laboratory.  9 units; second term. Prerequisites: Ph 2 a  or Ph 12 a, Ma 2, Ph 3, Ph 2 b or Ph 12 b (may be taken concurrently),  Ma 3 (may be taken concurrently).  - equipment and techniques to investigate topics in classical electrody -namics, resonance phenomena, waves, and other physical phenom -ena. Students develop critical, quantitative evaluations of the relevant     Ph 7. Physics Laboratory.  9 units; third term. Prerequisites: Ph6,  Ph2b or Ph12b, Ph2c or Ph12c taken concurrently.  A laboratory course  The course introduces some of the equipment and techniques used in  quantum, condensed matter, nuclear, and particle physics. The menu of     Ph 8 bc. Experiments in Electromagnetism.  3 units (0-3-0); second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ph 1 a.  that parallel the material of Ph 1 bc. It includes measuring the force be -tween wires with a homemade analytical balance, measuring properties  of a 1,000-volt spark, and building and studying a radio-wave transmit- of tools and electronic parts. Measurements are compared to theoretical   FS/Ph 9. Freshman Seminar: The Science of Music.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Freshman Seminar. Ph 10. Frontiers in Physics.  Open for credit  to freshmen and sophomores. Weekly seminar by a member of the  physics department or a visitor, to discuss his or her research at an   background material related to seminar topics and to answer questions   FS/Ph 11 abc. Freshman Seminar: Beyond Physics.  6 units (2-0-4). For course description, see Freshman Seminar. Physics708Ph 12 abc. Waves, Quantum Physics, and Statistical Mechanics.   1 abc, or equivalents. A one-year course primarily for students intend-ing further work in the physics option. Topics include classical waves;  wave mechanics, interpretation of the quantum wave-function, one- dimensional bound states, scattering, and tunneling; thermodynamics,  Filippone, Patterson.Ph 20. Computational Physics Laboratory I. -ond, third terms. Prerequisites: CS 1 or equivalent.  Introduction to the  manipulation packages for solution of physical problems. Python for    Ph 21. Computational Physics Laboratory II. second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 20 or equivalent experience with  programming.  Computational tools for data analysis. Use of python for  -stein.Ph 22. Computational Physics Laboratory III. second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 20 or equivalent experience with  programming and numerical techniques.  Computational tools and numerical techniques. Applications to problems in classical mechan - Ph 50 ab. Caltech Physics League. Prerequisites: Ph 1 abc.  This course serves as a physics club, meeting  A broad range of topics will be considered, such as energy production,  space and atmospheric phenomena, astrophysics, nano-science, and   addition to regular assignments, students will also compete in solving    Ph 70. Oral and Written Communication.  third terms.  Provides practice and guidance in oral and written commu -nication of material related to contemporary physics research. Students  will choose a topic of interest, make presentations of this material in  a variety of formats, and, through a guided process, draft and revise  a technical or review article on the topic. The course is intended for   709Ph 77 abc. Advanced Physics Laboratory.  second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 7 or instructor™s permission.  Ad-vanced preparation for laboratory research. Dual emphasis on practical   -luminate important theoretical concepts. Topics include advanced signal  acquisition, conditioning, and data processing, introductions to widely-   doppler-free spectroscopy. Fundamentals of vacuum engineering, thin-   Black, Libbrecht.  Ph 78 abc. Senior Thesis (Experiment).  terms. Prerequisites: To register for this course, the student must obtain  approval of the chair of the Physics Undergraduate Committee (Ken  Libbrecht).  Open only to senior physics majors. Experimental research  Two 15-minute presentations to the Physics Undergraduate Committee  third term. The written thesis must be completed and distributed to the  committee one week before the second presentation. Students wishing invited to consult with the chair of the Physics Undergraduate Commit-tee, or any other member of this committee. A grade will not be assigned   two terms, and then changed at the end of the course to the appropriate letter grade. Not offered on a pass/fail basis. Ph 79 abc. Senior Thesis (Theory).  terms. Prerequisites: To register for this course, the student must obtain  approval of the chair of the Physics Undergraduate Committee (Ken  Libbrecht).  Open only to senior physics majors. Theoretical research   Two 15-minute presentations to the Physics Undergraduate Committee  third term. The written thesis must be completed and distributed to the  committee one week before the second presentation. Students wishing invited to consult with the chair of the Physics Undergraduate Commit-tee, or any other member of this committee. A grade will not be assigned   two terms, and then changed at the end of the course to the appropriate letter grade. Not offered on a pass/fail basis. Ph 101. Order-of-Magnitude Physics.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Emphasis will be on using basic physics to understand complicated  -physics, weather, planetary science, astrophysics, cosmology, biome - Physics710Ay/Ph 104. Relativistic Astrophysics.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Astrophysics. Ph 105. Analog Electronics for Physicists.   -uisites: Ph1abc, Ma2, or equivalent. A laboratory course intended for graduate students, it covers the design, construction, and testing of simple, practical analog and interface circuits useful for signal condi -  analog multipliers, diodes, bipolar transistors, and passive circuit ele - laboratory. The course culminates in a two-week project of the student™s   Ph 106 abc. Topics in Classical Physics.  third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 2 ab or Ph 12 abc, Ma 2.  An intermedi-ate course in the application of basic principles of classical physics to a wide variety of subjects. Ph106a will be devoted to mechanics, including Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations of mechanics, small oscillations and normal modes, central forces, and rigid-body motion.  Ph106b will be devoted to fundamentals of electrostatics, magnetostat -ics, and electrodynamics, including boundary-value problems, multipole   special relativity. Ph106c will cover advanced topics in electromagne -  APh/Ph 112 ab.  Noise and Stochastic Resonance. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics.APh/Ph 115. Physics of Momentum Transport in Hydrodynamic Sys -tems. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics.APh/Ph/Ae 116. Physics of Thermal and Mass Transport in Hydro -dynamic Systems. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics.Ph/APh/EE/BE 118 ab.  Physics of Measurement. 9 units (3-0-6); sec- -mission from instructor.  This course explores the fundamental underpin-nings of experimental measurements from the perspectives of coupling, responsivity, noise, backaction, and information. Its overarching goal is  to enable students to develop intuition about, and to critically evaluate, a diversity of real measurement systems - and to provide a framework for estimating the ultimate and practical limits to information that can be extracted from them. Topics will include physical signal transduction  and responsivity, fundamental noise processes, modulation, frequency  conversion, synchronous detection, signal-sampling techniques, digitiza-tion, signal transforms, spectral analyses, and correlation methods. The  in second term will focus their application to high frequency, microwave,  and fast time-domain measurements where distributed approaches 711become imperative. The second term (in alternate years) may focus on  topics that include either measurements at the quantum limit, biosensing and biological interfaces, of functional brain imaging. Instructor: Roukes.  CS/Ph 120. Quantum Cryptography.  9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Computer Science.Ph 121 abc. Computational Physics Lab. third terms.  Many of the recent advances in physics are attributed to  progress in computational power. In the advanced computational lab,  students will hone their computational skills bu working through proj -ects inspired by junior level classes (such as classical mechanics and  E, statistical mechanics, quantum mechanics and quantum many-body physics). This course will primarily be in Python and Mathematica. This  Ph 125 abc. Quantum Mechanics.  terms. Prerequisites: Ma 2 ab, Ph 12 abc or Ph 2 ab, or equivalents.  A one-year course in quantum mechanics and its applications, for   - -cal particles, and selected topics in atomic, solid-state, nuclear, and   Ph 127 ab. Statistical Physics of Interacting Systems, Phases, and Phase Transitions.   Ph 12 c or equivalent; quantum mechanics at the level of Ph 125 ab is required for Ph 127 b; may be taken concurrently.  An advanced course in statistical physics that focuses on systems of interacting particles. Part a will cover interacting gases and spin models of magnetism,   b will introduce the path-integral based quantum to classical statisti -cal mechanics mapping, as well as dualities and topological-defects Ph 129 abc. Mathematical Methods of Physics. second terms.  Math-ematical methods and their application in physics. First term focuses on group theoretic methods in physics. Second term includes analytic methods such as complex analysis, differential equations, integral  equations and transforms, and other applications of real analysis. Third  term covers probability and statistics in physics. Each part may be taken independently. Part c not offered 2021-2022.  Instructors: X. Chen, Chatziioannou.Ph 135. Introduction to Condensed Matter.  term.  -Physics712sion. This course is an introduction to condensed matter which covers electronic properties of solids, including band structures, and transport. In addition, the course will introduce topological band-structure effects,  covering Berry phase, the Thouless pump, and topological insulators. Ph  135 is continued by Ph/APh 223 ab in the winter and spring terms. In-structor: Refael.Ph 136 abc. Applications of Classical Physics. second, third terms.  Prerequisites: Ph 106 ab or equivalent.  Applications of classical physics to topics of interest in contemporary ﬁmacroscopic™™  hydrodynamics; plasma physics; magnetohydrodynamics; thermody -namics and statistical mechanics; gravitation theory, including general  relativity and cosmology; modern optics. Content will vary from year to    focus on thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, random processes,     Ph/APh 137 abc. Atoms and Photons. terms. Prerequisites: Ph 125 ab or equivalent, or instructor™s permis -sion. This course will provide an introduction to the interaction of atomic  systems with photons. The main emphasis is on laying the foundation  - -    -ment, master equations, quantum jump formalism. Applications to   introduction to ultracold atoms, atomic clocks, searches for funda -mental symmetry violations, synthetic quantum matter, and solid state  quantum optics platforms. The emphasis will be on reading primary and    APh/Ph 138 ab. Quantum Hardware and Techniques.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Applied Physics.Ph 139. Introduction to Elementary Particle Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term.  permission. This course provides an introduction to particle physics which includes Standard Model, Feynman diagrams, matrix elements, electroweak theory, QCD, gauge theories, the Higgs mechanism, neu -trino mixing, astro-particle physics/cosmology, accelerators, experimen -tal techniques, important historical and recent results, physics beyond 713Weinstein. Ph 171. Reading and Independent Study.  Units in accordance with  work accomplished. Occasionally, advanced work involving reading,  special problems, or independent study is carried out under the supervi -sion of an instructor. Approval of the instructor and of the student™s  departmental adviser must be obtained before registering. The instruc -tor will complete a student evaluation at the end of the term. Graded Ph 172. Research in Physics.  Units in accordance with work accom -plished. Undergraduate students registering for 6 or more units of Ph    -dent™s research supervisor and departmental adviser must be obtained   Ph 177. Advanced Experimental Physics. terms.  A one- term laboratory course which will require students to design, assemble, calibrate, and use an apparatus to conduct a nontrivial experiment involving quantum optics or other current research area of physics. Students will work as part of a small team to reproduce the results of a published research paper. Each team will be guided by an instructor who  will meet weekly with the students; the students are each expected to spend an average of 4 hours/week in the laboratory and the remainder for study and design. Enrollment is limited. Permission of the instructors required. Instructors: Rice, Hutzler. CNS/Bi/Ph/CS/NB 187. Neural Computation. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Ph 198. Special Topics in Physics.  Units in accordance with work  accomplished. Topics will vary year to year and may include hands- on laboratory work, team projects and a survey of modern physics   Ph 199. Frontiers of Fundamental Physics.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. Prerequisites: Ph 125 ab, Ph 106 ab, or equivalent.  This course  focusing on the physics at the Large Hadron Collider. Topics include the  Standard Model of particle physics in light of the discovery of the Higgs   new particle™s quantum properties, its implications on physics beyond  the standard model, and its connection with the standard model of  cosmology focusing on the dark matter challenge. The course is geared   physics, although students in particle physics are welcome to attend.   Physics714Ph 201. Candidacy Physics Fitness. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  The course will review problem solving techniques and physics applications  from the undergraduate physics college curriculum. In particular, we will   -sical mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics and quantum  physics, optics, basic mathematical methods of physics, and the physi- Ph 203. Nuclear Physics.  An introduction and overview of modern topics in nuclear physics, including models and structure of nucleons, nuclei and nuclear matter, the electroweak interaction of nuclei, and nuclear/neu -trino astrophysics. Instructor: Filippone.  Ph 205 abc. Relativistic Quantum Field Theory.  second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 125.    Feynman diagrams, non-Abelian gauge theories, Higgs symmetry- Kapustin, Zurek, Wise.  Ph/CS 219 abc. Quantum Computation. third terms.  Prerequisites: Ph 125 ab or equivalent.  The theory of quan-tum information and quantum computation. Overview of classical in-formation theory, compression of quantum information, transmission of  quantum information through noisy channels, quantum error-correcting  codes, quantum cryptography and teleportation. Overview of classical  fault-tolerant quantum computation, physical implementations of quan- Ph/APh 223 ab. Advanced Condensed-Matter Physics. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  -  Advanced topics in condensed-matter physics, with emphasis on the effects of interactions, symmetry, and topology in many- body systems. Ph/APh 223a covers second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory of the electron gas, Mott insulators and quantum magnetism, spin liquids, bosonization, and the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect. Ph/APh 223b will continue with BCS theory of superconductivity,  Ginzburg-Landau theory, elements of unconventional and topological su - Mott insulators, and some aspects of quantum systems with random-ness. Instructor: Alicea.Ph 229 abc. Advanced Mathematical Methods of Physics. 9 units   Ad-vanced topics in geometry and topology that are widely used in modern theoretical physics. Emphasis will be on understanding and applications more than on rigor and proofs. First term will cover basic concepts in topology and manifold theory. Second term will include Riemannian   715of Riemann surfaces, with emphasis on applications to string theory. Part  c will not be offered in 2021-2022.  Instructors: Ooguri, Kapustin.Ph 230 abc. Elementary Particle Theory.   terms. First term: Standard model, including electroweak and strong interactions, symmetries and symmetry breaking (including the Higgs mechanism), parton model and -perturbative phenomena, including chiral symmetry breaking, instantons, the 1/N expansion, lattice gauge theories, and topological solitons. Other  - - Part c will not be offered in 2021-2022.  Instructors: Zurek, Gukov. Ph 232. Introduction to Topological Field Theory.  term.   -able and generally covariant. During the past twenty years they have been the main source of interaction between physics and mathematics. Thus, ideas from gauge theory led to the discovery of new topological invariants for 3-manifolds and 4-manifolds. By now, topological quantum  this course is to give an accessible introduction to this elegant sub-ject. Instructor: Gukov. Ph 235 ab. Theoretical Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics.  9  Cosmology -genesis, neutrino and nuclear astrophysics. Second term: Cosmological perturbation theory and the cosmic microwave background, structure formation, theories of dark matter.  Instructor: Zurek.  2022.Ph 236 abc. General Relativity.   -requisite: a mastery of special relativity at the level of Goldstein™s Classi -cal Mechanics, or of Jackson™s Classical Electrodynamics.  A systematic  to gravitational waves, black holes, relativistic stars, causal structure of    Teukolsky. Ph 237. Gravitational Radiation. 9 units (3-0-6) third term.   Prerequi -sites: Ph 106 b, Ph 12 b or equivalents. Special topics in Gravitational-wave Detection. Physics of interferometers, limits of measurement,    Physics716Ph 242 ab. Physics Seminar.  An introduction to independent research, including training in relevant  professional skills and discussion of current Caltech research areas with  Caltech faculty, postdocs, and students. One meeting per week plus   Ph 250. Introduction to String Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: Ph 205 or equivalent.  version of the course. It will cover a condensed version of the world-sheet formulation, then basic elements of the target space physics,   T-duality, D-branes, anomalies, building semi-realistic models of particle    -fered 2021-2022. Ph 300. Thesis Research.  Units in accordance with work accom -plished.  -gressed to the point where research leads directly toward the thesis for  the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Approval of the student™s research  supervisor and department adviser or registration representative must   POLITICAL SCIENCEPS 12. Introduction to Political Science.   terms. Introduction to the tools and concepts of analytical political  science. Subject matter is primarily American political processes and in - presidential campaign strategy, Congress, congressional-bureaucratic  relations, and coverage of political issues by the mass media. Instruc - PS 20. Political-Economic Development and Material Culture.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. During the 19th-century the American economy, despite the Civil War, caught up to and surpassed all Eu -ropean economies. How did the likes of Singer, John Deere and Seth  Thomas Š latecomers to the markets they servedŠcome to dominate those markets both domestically and internationally? Why did the tech -nology of interchangeable parts and mass production become known  as ™the American system™ when much of that technology was imported  from Europe? What role did government play in facilitating or thwart -  label ™antiques™. What do we learn from the fact that we can document   comparable European company? Why is the hand sewn quilt a nearly  unique American folk art form and what does the evolution of quilt-ing patterns tell us about technology and economic prosperity? What  717do baking powder cans as a category of collectible tell us about the   answers, all with an eye to understanding the interplay of economics,  BEM/Ec/PS 80. Frontiers in Social Sciences. . For course description, see Business, Economics, and Management.PS 97. Undergraduate Research.  Unites to be arranged; any term. Prerequisites: advanced political science and instructor™s permission.   research in political science individually or in a small group. Graded  PS 99 ab. Political Science Research Seminar.  second terms. Prerequisites: political science major; completion of a  required PS course for major.  Development and presentation of a major  research paper on a topic of interest in political science or political  economy. The project will be one that the student has initiated in a  political science course they have already taken from the PS courses  required for the PS option, numbered above 101. This course will be  devoted to understanding research in political science, and basic politi - journals, work to understand a research literature of interest, and work    PS 101. Selected Topics in Political Science.  Units to be determined  Instruc-PS 120. American Electoral Behavior and Party Strategy.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.    views of the strategies followed by the parties. Two substantial papers   PS 121. Analyzing Congress.  Introduction to  the US Congress with an emphasis on thinking analytically and empiri -cally about the determinants of Congressional behavior. Among the fac -  of powers, political parties, Congressional elections, and interest group   PS 122. Political Representation.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prereq -uisite: PS 12. Why does the U.S. Constitution feature separation of   -ter? When can Congress agree on the best policy for the country (and  what does ﬁbestﬂ even mean)? This course uses a rigorous set of tools  Political Science718including game theory and social choice to help students understand  Using the tools, we study U.S. electoral systems, Congress, federalism,  and the courts, with a focus on understanding how the country has tried to overcome the challenges of group decision making and the inevitable   political interests. Students will leave the course with a deeper under - Gibilisco.PS 123. Regulation and Politics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prereq -uisite: PS 12.regulatory agencies and trace their development over the past century  or so. It will also investigate a number of current issues in regulatory   - approaches to regulations instead of traditional ﬁcommand-and-con -  9 units (3- 0-6); second term. Prerequisite: Ec 122.  For course description, see Economics. 9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond term.  topics such as terrorism, ethnic violence, civil wars, the Israeli-Pales - these phenomena using the rational choice framework and modern   their terminations as outcomes of strategic decision-making and to un- IDS/Ec/PS 126. Applied Data Analysis.  -requisites: Math 3/103 or ACM/EE/IDS 116, Ec 122 or IDS/ACM/CS 157  or Ma 112a. For course description, see Information and Data Sciences.An/PS 127. Corruption. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Anthropology.  PS 132. Formal Theories in Political Science. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: PS 12 and Ec/PS 172.   -havioral interpretations of game theoretic and social choice models and   PS 135. Analyzing Legislative Elections. The purpose of this course is to understand legislative elections. The course  -719some of the consequences of legislative elections, such as divided  PS 139. Comparative Politics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite:  PS 12. empirical research in comparative political economy. An emphasis will  be placed on the parallel process of political and economic develop -ment and its consequences on current democratic political institutions  -tial governments, legislatures, judicial systems, and bureaucratic agen - impact of these political institutions on the type of policies they imple-ment and the economic outcomes they produce. The main objective of   light of their empirical support, coming mainly from statistical analysis.  PS 141 ab. A History of Budgetary Politics in the United States. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.     - Ec/PS 160 abc. Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences. 9 units (3-3-3). For course description, see Economics. PS/Ec 172. Game Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: Ec  11 or PS 12 and one from the following list: ACM 116, ACM 117, Ma 3,  or Ma/ACM/IDS 140ab. This course is an introduction to non-coopera -tive game theory, with applications to political science and economics.  and introduces solutions concepts that are relevant for situations of  complete and incomplete information. The basic theory of repeated  games is introduced. Applications are to auction theory and asymmetric  information in trading models, cheap talk and voting rules in congress,   PSYCHOLOGY Psy 13. Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. This course will provide an introduction to what we know about  the fascinating link between the brain, the mind, and behavior. We will  start with a basic review of the brain as a biological organ, its evolu -tion, development, and its basic operations including visual and others™  Psychology720  Psy 25. Reading and Research in Psychology.  Units determined by the instructor.    2021-2022.Psy 90. Applied Neuropsychology of Learning.  term. An introduction to the neuropsychological mechanisms associ - behaviors impede and enhance them. No previous coursework in  psychology or neuroscience is required. The course includes labs in  which the students will test various hypothesis about their own learning   overall HSS core requirements but does not count towards the introduc -  Psy 101. Selected Topics in Psychology.  Units determined by arrange- CNS/Psy/Bi 102 ab. Brains, Minds, and Society.  9 units (3-0-6); sec-ond, third terms.  For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Psy/CNS 105 ab. Frontiers in Neuroeconomics.  5 units (1.5-0-3.5); second term. The new discipline of Neuroeconomics seeks to under -stand the mechanisms underlying human choice behavior, born out of   and Economics. This seminar will consider a variety of emerging themes   bases of reward and motivation, the neural representation of utility and  risk, neural systems for inter-temporal choice, goals vs habits, and  strategic interactions. We will also spend time evaluating various forms   reinforcement-learning, Bayesian models and race to barrier models.  - Psy 115. Social Psychology.  The study of how people think about other people and behave toward or around oth -ers. Topics include social cognition and emotions (theory of mind and  empathy), their development from childhood to old age, impairments in  social functions, altruism and cooperation, social groups (ingroup and  outgroup), attribution and stereotypes. The class also presents evidence  on how these social phenomena are implemented in the human brain    721Psy 120. Metascience: The Science of Being An Impactful Scien-tist. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. There are no prerequisites, but having  taken Bi/CNS 150 would be advantageous. This course will provide the  student with a unique insight into the skills used by successful scientists  in the social sciences, with the focus being on psychology and cognitive neuroscience (although this is interesting for any type of science career).  The course promotes active (hands on) learning, to enhance skills such  as creative idea formation, theory, science communication including  presentation and writing skills for the public. The class will also provide   Psy 125. Reading and Research in Psychology.  Same as Psy 25, but for graduate credit.    Psy/CNS 130. Introduction to Human Memory.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. -retical issues in the study of human memory. Topics include iconic and  echoic memory, working memory, spatial memory, implicit learning and    activation models and connectionist networks, memory and emotion,  2021-2022.CNS/Psy/Bi 131. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Psy/CNS 132. Computational Reinforcement-learning in Biological  and Non-biological Systems. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  Reinforce -ment-learning concerns the computational principles by which animals    been a rich interplay between the development and application of re - -tion of reinforcement-learning in biological systems, including humans.  This course will review this rich literature, covering the psychology of  animal-learning, the neurobiology of reward and reinforcement, and the  theoretical basis and application of reinforcement-learning models to   Psy 133. Computation, Cognition and Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. recent advances in computational neuroscience for central problems  of philosophy of mind. Beginning with a historical overview of compu-tationalism (the thesis that mental states are computational states), the  in computational terms across a variety of levels of description, from  sub-neuronal and single neuroncomputation to circuit and network   -Psychology722  -tion, dynamical systems, and mental representation; whether conscious   2021-2022.Pl/CNS/NB/Bi/Psy 161. Consciousness. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Philosophy.  CNS/Bi/Psy/NB 176. Cognition. 9 units (4-0-5); third term.  For course description, see Computation and Neural Systems. Psy/Bi/CNS 255. Topics in Emotion and Social Cognition.  9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisite: NB/Bi/CNS 150 or instructor™s permis -sion. Emotions are at the forefront of most human endeavors. Emotions  aid us in decision-making (gut feelings), help us remember, torment us,  yet have ultimately helped us to survive. Over the past few decades, we  -   -biological systems that underlie negative and positive emotions and move onto weekly discussions, based on assigned journal articles that    In addition to these discussions and readings, each student will be  required to write a review paper or produce a short movie on a topic  related to one of the emotions discussed in these seminars and its  Psy 283 abc. Graduate Proseminar in Social and Decision Neuro -science.  The course involves student presentations of their research, reading and discussion  of recent research in social and decision neuroscience, and develop - research ethics, writing grants and peer review. This course is only  open to graduate students in the Social and Decision Neuroscience,  Computational and Neural Systems and Social Science PhD programs.   SS/Psy/CNS 285. Topics in Social, Cognitive, and Decision Scienc -es. 3 units (1.5-0-1.5). For course description, see Social Science.723SCIENTIFIC AND ENGINEERING  COMMUNICATION  SEC 10. Technical Seminar Presentations.  -ond, third terms;  (Seniors required to take this course are given priority  in registration.).  The purpose of this course is to equip students with  discussions, practice presentations, and individual feedback.  Limited   SEC 11.  Written Academic Communication in Engineering and Ap -plied Science.  This class provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in academic technical writing in engineering and applied science. Students will choose a tech-nical topic of interest, possibly based on a previous research or course project, and write a paper in an academic genre on that topic. Appropri -ate genres include the engineering report, review paper, or a peer- reviewed journal paper. Students will receive instruction in academic  discourse in engineering and applied sciences as well as substantial feedback on their work-in-progress. This course is recommended for  students who plan to attend graduate school or who wish to work toward writing requirement. Enrollment is limited to students in E&AS options and priority is given to seniors. Other students may join the wait list and will be added to the class as space permits. Instructor: TBD. SEC 12. Written Professional Communication in Engineering and  Applied Science.    This class introduces students to common workplace genres applied sciences. Students will study and practice effective writing  strategies within these genres and consider the varied audiences and goals of communicating in engineering and applied science industries. Genres covered may include job applications; performance reviews and recommendation letters; clean code and code documentation; technical reports; progress reports; proposals; or recommendation reports. This  course is recommended for students who plan to seek jobs in industry.  students in E&AS options and priority is given to seniors. Other students may join the wait list and will be added to the class as space permits. In-structor: TBD.SEC 13. Written Communication about Engineering and Applied  Science to Non-Specialists.   - Engineers and applied scientists often work on highly technical, specialized projects. However, their work is often of interest  to readers with varied areas and levels of technical expertise, including investors, community stakeholders, government regulators, consumers, voters, students, and enthusiasts. This course introduces students to  Scientific and Engineering Communication724diverse types of writing about technical engineering and applied science all of the technical knowledge the author has. Students will compose multiple texts written for different purposes and to different types of audi -ences outside of their area of expertise. This course is recommended  careers, where communication to non-specialists is crucial to success. It may also interest students who enjoy public advocacy or creative writing Enrollment is limited to students in E&AS options and priority is given to seniors. Other students may join the wait list and will be added to the class as space permits. Instructor: TBD.  -tion. Units to be arranged; terms to be arranged in consultation with the instructor.  Content may vary from year to year, at a level suitable for  advanced undergraduate or graduate students. Topics will be chosen to     9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.E/SEC 103. Management of Technology.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.ChE/Ch/Bi/SEC 107. Social Media for Scientists. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Chemical Engineering.Scientists. 6 units (3-0-3); third term.  Prerequisites: none.  This graduate  - -tions, written articles, and visual narratives. In-class workshops will provide students with the opportunity to revise their work and consider  feedback from others.  Each student will complete the class with a portfolio of projects highlighting various aspects of their communication  skills. (Registration by application only, and EAS graduate students are    SEC 120. Data Visualization Projects.  6 units (2-0-4); third term.  This course will provide students with a forum for discussing and working    -tices in science and engineering. Working together, we will help create  and edit students™ graphics and other visual forms of data to improve  understanding. We will consider the strengths and weaknesses of com -municating information visually in drawing, design and diagramming movies, animation, as well as public presentation materials, depending  725on the needs of students™ projects. Our approach will be derived from  design principles outlined by Edward Tufte and others. The course is  targeted towards students across disciplines using visual display and    SEC 130. Science Activation: Bringing Science to Society.  6 units (3-0-3); second term. Prerequisites: none.  Working with policy makers  is more than science communication. It requires a bilateral approach   objectives as well as physical requirements. An intellectual under - policy realms can help scientists make better decisions about how to  communicate about their work and engage with policy makers to get it  -  SOCIAL SCIENCE SS 200. Selected Topics in Social Science.  Units to be determined   SS 201 abc. Analytical Foundations of Social Science. 9 units (3-0-6);  This course covers the fundamentals of utility theory, game theory, and social choice theory. These basic theories are  developed and illustrated with applications to electoral politics, market trading, bargaining, auctions, mechanism design and implementation,   -  Echenique, Saito, Pomatto.SS 202 abc. Political Theory.   Course will introduce the student to the central problemswh of political  theory and analysis, beginning with the essential components of the democratic state and proceeding through a variety of empirical top -ics. These topics will include the analysis of electoral and legislative institutions, legislative agenda processes, voting behavior, comparative    discipline and trained in the most general applications of game theoretic  reasoning to political science. Open to Social Science graduate stu - SS 205 abc. Foundations of Economics. third terms.  This is a graduate course in the fundamentals of economics.  Social Science726 neo-classical theory of consumption and production, general equilib - economic consequences of asymmetric information and incomplete markets, and recursive methods with applications to labor eco-nomics   SS 209. Behavioral Economics.  SS 201 abc or instructor™s permission.  -chological facts and constructs can be used to inform models of limits   -consumers are limited in rationality, behavioral game theory, behavioral   - SS 210 abc. Foundations of Political Economy.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisites: SS 202c, SS 205b.  Mathematical theories of individual and social choice applied to problems of welfare  economics and political decision making as well as to the construction of political economic processes consistent with stipulated ethical postu -lates, political platform formulation, the theory of political coalitions, and  SS 211 abc. Advanced Economic Theory.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.   area of economic theory, with topics varying from year to year according   SS 212 abc. Experimental Economics. and third terms. Prerequisites: SS 201abc, SS 202abc, SS 205 abc,  SS 222 abc or with permission of the instructor.  This three-quarter  sequence is designed for advanced Social Science Ph.D. students with the aim of introducing students to the methodology of modern    are not limited to individual decision making, preference and belief elici -tation, game theory, social learning, bargaining, labor economics, public   - how the dialog between theoretical analysis and laboratory data feeds   - SS 213 abc. Financial Economics. and optimal portfolio selection. Methods of stochastic, Ito calculus for 727  equations, intertemporal consumption-based asset pricing theories, recent developments in intermediary-based and behavioral asset pric -  -cal facts. Trading strategies implemented by hedge funds. Prescriptive  SS 218. Neuroscience Applications to Economics and Politics.  9  -roscience that inform how individuals make economic decisions. Ap -plications of neuroscience ideas and methods to understanding choice  under risk and uncertainty, temporal discounting and self-control,  advertisement and preference formation, habit, addiction, and judgment   SS 222 abc. Econometrics.  Introduction to the use of multivariate and nonlinear methods in the so -cial sciences. Open to Social Science graduate students only. Instruc -SS 223 abc. Topics in Theoretical and Applied Econometrics.  9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms. Prerequisites: SS 222 abc; may be repeated  for credit.  The courses in this sequence cover advanced methods and tools in econometrics, as well as their applications to a variety of topics  -mation economics, political economy, market design, and behavioural  SS 224. Social Science Data. This course provides broad coverage of empirical methods in the social sciences.  This includes both methods of data collection and practical aspects of     SS 225. Experimetrics. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.    the laboratory approach to economic questions. The course critically   design. Methodological topics may include testing theories in two-by-two designs, power and optimal design, classifying subjects into canonical types, testing based on elicited preferences and beliefs, and  challenges introduced by communication and dynamics in economic   Social Science728SS 228 abc. Applied Empirical Methods in the Social Sciences. 9  Course covers methods used in con-temporary applied empirical work in a variety of social sciences. Topics   -ment and computation of large datasets, (b) reduced form methods   estimation. Emphasis is on the application of tools to substantive social science problems rather than statistical theory, in areas including politi - - SS 229 abc. Theoretical and Quantitative Dimensions of Historical  Development. 9 units (3-0-6); second, third terms.  May be repeated  for credit. Introduction to modern quantitative history. The tools of eco -nomic and political theory applied to problems of economic, social, and    and then changed to the appropriate letter grade at the end of the third  SS 231 abc. American and Comparative Politics. second terms. Prerequisites: SS 202 abc, or permission of the instructor.  An advanced graduate Social Science sequence in American and com-parative politics. The sequence will focus on political institutions and behavior, introducing students to the important theories of American  and comparative politics. Students will learn how historical, observa -  SS 260. Experimental Methods of Political Economy.  9 units (3-3-3);     - - SS 281. Graduate Social Science Writing Seminar.  9 units (3-0-6); Only open to advanced graduate students in social science. How can social scientists write in a style that makes someone actually   SS 282 abc. Graduate Proseminar in Social Science.  3 units (1.5-0- Course for graduate students in social sciences. Students present their research and lead discussion of mate -rial relevant to their research program. Open to Social Science Graduate   729SS/Psy/CNS 285. Topics in Social, Cognitive, and Decision Sci -ences. The goal of this course is to introduce graduate students to current research questions  in cognitive sciences, political science, and economics. Select faculty will present their research background, methods, and a sampling of  current studies. Background readings and pdf of presentation will be   SS 299. Writing.  6 units (3-0-3); summer term. This course is designed  language. This course is only open to graduate students in the Social  SS 300. Research in Social Science.  Units to be arranged. STUDENT ACTIVITIESSA 15 abc. Student Publications. 15bc 4 units (1-0-3), second and third terms.  Prerequisites: SA 15a is a  prerequisite for SA 15b and SA 15c.  This course will enable students to produce quality, journalistically-crafted stories for the Tech newspaper.  It will teach journalistic values of clarity, accuracy, fairness and balance,  and acquaint the students with the primary elements of journalism,   distinctions. Students will produce feature stories for the Tech (with      SA 16 abc. Cooking Basics.  terms.  cuisines from around the world. Topics covered may include knives and   beans; meat; dessert. The emphasis will be on presentation and creativ - SA 42. Computer Science Education in K-14 Settings Practicum. 4    This course  to continue as part of a teaching group partnered with a local school or   hours teaching and 2 hours developing curricula. Students may take SA  SA 80 abc. Health Advocates.  A course designed to involve students with health care and educa -tion, develop familiarity with common college health problems, and   Student Activities730   -pected to devote one hour per week to a supervised clinical internship   SA 81 ab. Peer Advocates.  A course designed to involve students with appropriate peer support  and education, develop familiarity with common college mental health problems, and provide peer mental health support to students on and  prior to the year of service, and continue coursework in the following fall suicide prevention training using the QPR (Question, Persuade, Refer)     VISUAL CULTURE Hum/VC 48. Ways of Seeing.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. For course description, see Humanities.Hum/VC 49. Consuming Victorian Media.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Humanities.Hum/VC 50. Introduction to Film. 9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see Humanities.Hum/VC 51. Icons and Iconoclasm. 9 units (3-0-6). For course de-scription, see Humanities.Hum/VC 52. The Legacy of the Mexican School in Black and Latino Artistic Imaginaries. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Hu-manities.VC 53. Making Data Visual.  6 units (3-0-3); third term.  This course will explore and experiment with strategies and approaches to rendering -ences. Students will work towards individual pieces and a collabora-quantitative data. All/any forms are encouraged: virtual/technological  media, painting, performance, sculpture, poetry, public interventions,   related texts, the critical examination of art that intersects with science, and independent/collaborative research experiments with various formal processes, students will gain an understanding of how the visual can: expand or constrict knowledge; pose more questions than answers; provoke extreme emotional reactions and intellectual responses; and 731actively involve the viewer. Taught concurrently with CS 163 and can  only be taken once, as VC 53 or CS 163. Instructor: Slavick.VC 54. Relative to You: Representing Scale in Art and Science.  6 units (3-0-3); second term. The relationship to scale is an essential component that both artists and scientists contend with. How do we con-ceptualize the very, very large and the very, very small and even more  challenging, how do we represent extreme scales of size or time in an  to communicate that scale. This course will take an interdisciplinary ap -proach in thinking and making to include history, theory, and the creation  of artwork. Each student will use their major as the bounding point to explore what scale means in their discipline to conceptualize three key themes in the course: mapping, size, and time. In lectures, readings, and writing, students will explore the trajectory and visual histories of scale between the interconnections of art and science. The course will include  regular drawing assignments as a tool to visualize thinking. Students will have the autonomy to create their projects in the medium of their choice (sculpture, painting, video, or creative use of technology to make an art-work). The course will include drawing and making demos; no previous  art experience is required. Instructor: Halloran.VC 60. Art/Media.  announcement. A practice-based course taught by a visiting artist in  VC 70. Traditions of Japanese Art.  9 units (3-0-6); third term.  An introduction to the great traditions of Japanese art from prehistory   achievements of sculpture, painting, temple architecture, and ceramics  as representations of each artistic tradition, whether native or adapted  from foreign sources. Fundamental problems of style and form will  be discussed, but aesthetic analysis will always take place within the  2021-2022.VC 72. Data, Algorithms and Society.  9 units (3-0-6). For course   VC/E 81. Careers in STEAM.  1 unit (1-0-0); third term.  A series of weekly seminars by practitioners in industry and academia working at the intersections of science, technology, engineering, art and design.   these interdisciplinary areas. Guest speakers will talk about their career  trajectory, the nature of their work and the role that science, engineering   -  Visual Culture 732 coding, technological art and other areas. Topics will be presented at an    E/VC 88. Critical Making. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering. E/H/VC 89. New Media Arts in the 20th and 21st Centuries. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Engineering.VC 90. Reading in Visual Culture.  terms.   An individual program of directed reading in Visual Culture, in areas not covered by regular  courses. VC 90 is intended primarily for Visual Culture minors. Interested  students should confer with a Visual Culture faculty member and agree  upon a topic before registering for the course. Instructors: Faculty, Staff. VC/H 102. Looking East/Looking West.  9 units (3-0-6); third  term. From teapots to pastries, photographs to palanquins, objects and  ﬁOrientﬂ and the ﬁOccidentﬂ. This class looks at the visual and material culture produced by and consumed during encounters between Euro -pean and Asian travelers, diplomats, artists, writers, and tourists since  VC 104. French Cinema.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see L   En/VC 108. Volcanoes.  9 units (3-0-6). For class description, see English.L/VC 109. Introduction to French Cinema from Its Beginning to the  Present.  9 units (3-0-6). For class description, see Languages.En/VC 110.  Sinners, Saints, and Sexuality in Premodern Litera-ture. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see English.En/VC 117. Picturing the Universe. 9 units (3-0-6). For class descrip-tion, see English.VC 120. Landscape, Representation and Society.  6 units (2-2-2); third  term. This course examines historical and contemporary representations of the natural world in art and science through a social lens. We will draw  upon theory and practices from art, science, geography and landscape studies to critically analyze how artists, explorers, speculators, scientists, military strategists, and local inhabitants use environmental imagery  Students will learn to think critically while developing creative, cultur-ally complex approaches to observing, recording and representing the 733natural world. Students hoping to combine their course work with a re-search paper may sign up for a separate independent study and conduct research concurrently, with instructor approval.  Instructor: Mushkin. Not offered 2021-2022. En/VC 129. Literature/Photography/Facticity.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see English.VC 130. Surveillance.  This course examines wide-ranging implications (from intelligence gathering and biometrics to social media and contemporary art), and a key point of intersection between modern technology and visual culture. Though it applies more   practices today. Building on these etymological roots, we will treat sur -history of surveillance (and counter-surveillance) techniques as well as the theories that have emerged to describe its social effects, moral and  ethical stakes, and changing legal status. Instructor: Jacobson.En/VC 135.   9 units (3-0-6). Four course description, see English.VC 150. Art Museum Futures.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. The late 1960s saw the beginning of a movement in which several generations of artists investigated and deconstructed the customs and institutions of art. Institutional critique, as it would come to be known, challenged the prom-ises and putative neutrality of public art museums. Following several decades of criticism the question remains unanswered: can the public art  -going debates around race, ethnicity, objectivity, subjectivity and cultural  authority in contemporary museology. We will begin with the Enlighten -ment origins of the European art museum and its deployment within the United States; we will consider the artistic interventions that exposed its arts institutions and contemporary efforts at decolonization. Relying on  decolonial and ethnic studies scholars, we will develop a critical frame-work for understanding the historical pathways that led to the National Museum of African American History and Culture and the upcoming  Latino Smithsonian Museum. We will conclude with a deep dive into a   Assemblage Sculptureﬂ. Instructor: Decemvirale.L/VC 153. Refugees and Migrants™ Visual and Textual Representa -tions. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see Languages.VC 159. Los Angeles As Artwork. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This survey introduces students to the history of Los Angeles™ creative  practices. Covering a broad range of environments and visual cultures,  Visual Culture 734 in contemporary Los Angeles. Reading the city as artwork will introduce    -jects, urban landscapes, maps, monuments, murals and photographs. The class will give special attention to how colonialism continues to    -nity, public space, and the outstanding role race has played in shaping   - -rale.En/VC 160 ab. Classical Hollywood Cinema. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see English.En/VC 161. The New Hollywood. 9 units (3-0-6). For course descrip-tion, see English.VC/H/HPS 163. Science on Screen.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Many of our ideas about who scientists are and what they do have been formed through media consumption - especially from the movies. This  course examines how our ideas about science have been constructed at the movies and on television, and how science and cinema, their histories, philosophies, and visual cultures, are interconnected. Instruc-tor: Shell.VC/H/HPS 164. Fashion and Waste.  9 units (3-0-6); second term. Before the Industrial Revolution, new clothes were few and far between.  By the early 1800s, new industrial recycling processes enabled wool    at increased social mobility. Today we take for granted fast fashion and   -ship among history, technology, and the ways in which we construct our   sources will be front and center. Students will dig into their own closets,   VC 169. The Arts of Dynastic China. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  A survey of the development of Chinese art in which the major achieve-ments in architecture, sculpture, painting, calligraphy, and ceramics will   on the aesthetic appreciation of Chinese art as molded by the philoso -   2021-2022.735VC 170. Special Topics in Visual Culture.   announcement. An advanced humanities course on a special topic in vi- architecture, photography or cartography. It is usually taught by new or   in the course announcement. Limited to 15 students. See registrar™s an -VC 171. Arts of Buddhism. 9 units (3-0-6); third term.  of the impact of Buddhism on the arts and cultures of India, South - century B.C.E. India through various doctrinal transformations to the  Zen revival of 18th-century Japan. Select monuments of Buddhist art,  including architecture, painting, sculpture, and ritual objects, will serve  as focal points for discussions on their aesthetic principles and for   VC 172. Heritage and Its Discontents: Historic Conservation and the Battlegrounds of Memory.   What makes an  environmental dimensions of heritage culture. Moving from local conser-vation efforts to comparative frameworks of national and global heritage,  we will examine the management of built and natural environments as it pertains to questions of narrative, values, standards of beauty, and jus - Park Service, to UNESCO and the architectural legacies of the Atlantic  slave trade, our class will grapple with the theories, practices, and debates of heritage conservation as they determine what gets preserved and which stories get told. Readings/viewings will be supplemented with  Hori, Jurca.VC 175. The Art of Science. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course   the humanities-with an emphasis on forms and practices of visual culture that blur the boundaries between science, technology, and art. What  role, we will ask, have visual culture and visuality played in the construc- approach, we will explore topics including representations of science and technology in the arts and popular culture; the use of photography, illus -tration, and visualization in the sciences; histories of visuality and visual  Jacobson.H/HPS/VC 185. Angels and Monsters: Cosmology, Anthropology,  and the Ends of the World.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. Visual Culture 736H/HPS/VC 186. From Plato to Pluto: Maps, Exploration and Culture  from Antiquity to the Present.  9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see History. WRITING Wr 1. Introduction to Academic Writing for Multilingual Writers.  9 units (3-0-6); TBD.    of others, locate and provide convincing evidence, and understand the   course focuses on the challenges of academic writing that can be espe-cially demanding for multilingual writers, including mastery of Academic English, understanding American academic conventions regarding  citation and plagiarism, and being comfortable with American academic  will take several writing projects through multiple stages of revision, im -proving their work with feedback from seminar discussions, workshops,  and frequent one-to-one conferences with the instructor. Students are  placed in Wr 1 based on a writing assessment that is required of all in -coming students; successful completion of the course is required before  taking freshman humanities courses. Enrolled students may be required    Wr 2. Introduction to Academic Writing.    -cally, the course teaches students how to articulate a position, situate    projects through multiple stages of revision, improving their work with  feedback from seminar discussions, workshops, and frequent one- to-one conferences with the instructor. Students are placed in Wr 2  based on a writing assessment that is required of all incoming students;  successful completion of the course is required before taking freshman    Wr 3. Reading and Composing Academic Writing.  9 units (1-0-8); second term. This course builds on Wr 1 or 2 for students who need ad -ditional instruction in both the core concepts and practices of academic  writing before beginning their freshman humanities coursework. The  course will focus on developing critical reading skills and composing  successful academic essays. By taking several writing projects through  737multiple stages of revision, students will develop a deeper sense of  their strengths and limitations as writers, and seminar discussions,  workshops, and frequent one-to-one conferences with the instructor  will equip students to address those limitations. Not available for credit  toward the humanities-social science requirement. Enrolled students   -Wr 4. Principles and Practices of Academic Writing.  3 units (1-0-2); second term. Taken simultaneously with a freshman humanities course,   writing. By focusing on the diverse scenes, situations, and genres  of academic writing, the course aims to support writers both in their concurrent work writing in humanistic disciplines and to connect that  learning to writing tasks that students will encounter in other academic  locations. Not available for credit toward the humanities-social science   Wr 50. Tutorial in Writing.   terms.   about their work as writers. Not available for credit toward the humani - En/Wr 84.  Communicating Science to Non-Experts. 9 units (3-0-6). For course description, see English.  6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see English as a Second Language. ESL/Wr 108.  Intermedia Graduate Writing Seminar.  6 units (3-0-3). For course description, see English as a Second Language. Wr 109.  Writing and Publishing Research Articles in STEM Fields.  6 units (3-0-3); summer term. This course focuses on strategies for com- -pose and form of each section of the journal article will be considered in  depth. The course is intended for graduate students who are prepared  to be a lead author on a manuscript. While the course will cover strate-gies for collaborative writing, students will be asked to draft sections of an original journal article based upon their own research. The course will  also provide instruction on selecting a target journal, preparing a manu -script for submission, and responding to feedback from peer reviewers.   - Writing 738738738Section SixTrustees,  Administration,  Faculty 739Historical Sketch739Historical SketchOFFICERSDavid L. Lee, Chair Ronald K. Linde, Vice Chair Thomas F. Rosenbaum,  President  David A. Tirrell,  Provost Dexter A. Bailey, Jr.  Vice President for Advancement and  Alumni RelationsMatthew Brewer  Controller Kevin M. Gilmartin Diana Jergovic Vice President, Strategy  ImplementationCathy A. Light  Secretary, Board of Trustees Jennifer T. Lum  General CounselSharon E. Patterson  Treasurer Scott H. Richland Margo SteurbautVice President of Administration and  General Larry D. James Deputy Director, Interim Vice President  and Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory BOARD OF TRUSTEES   TRUSTEES(with date of first election) William H. Ahmanson (2017) President  The Ahmanson FoundationSean Bailey (2015) President  Walt Disney Studios Motion  Picture Production Barbara M. Barrett (2014)  AmbassadorRebecka Belldegrun (2016)   Bellco Capital, LLCBrigitte M. Bren (2009)    International Strategic Planning Janet C. Campagna (2017) Chair QS InvestorsDavid E. Chavez (2017) Los Alamos National LaboratoryJohn S. Chen (2008) Executive Chairman of the Board and   BlackBerryRobert B. Chess (2006) Chairman Nektar TherapeuticsDavid T. Dreier (2013)  Chairman Annenberg-Dreier Commission Lounette M. Dyer (1998) Entrepreneur Joshua S. Friedman (2011) Co-Founder, Co-Chairman and   Canyon Partners, LLCWilliam T. Gross (1994)   IdealabDavid D. Ho (1997)   Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center,  Clyde and Helen Wu Professor of  Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos  College of Physicians and Surgeons G. Bradford Jones (2014)  Founding Partner Redpoint Ventures Peter D. Kaufman (2008)  Glenair, Inc. Joseph E. Kiani (2021) Masimo CorporationLouise Kirkbride (1995) Entrepreneur Walter G. Kortschak (2012)  Senior Advisor and Former Managing Partner Summit Partners, L.P. 739Board of Trustees 740Trustees, Administration, Faculty Jon B. Kutler (2005)  Admiralty Partners, Inc.Taylor W. Lawrence (2017) David L. Lee (2000) Managing General Partner Clarity Partners, L.P. Li Lu (2018) Founder and Chairman Himalaya Capital Management, LLCAlexander Lidow (1998)  EPC CorporationFariborz Maseeh (2021) Founder The Massiah FoundationMichelle J. Mathews-Spradlin (2016Deborah D. McWhinney (2007)   Citi Enterprise Payments Citi BankAlexander R. Mehran, Sr. (2017)  Chairman of the Board  Sunset Development CompanyKenneth G. Moore (2014)     Trustee  Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation Philip M. Neches (1995) Venture Partner  Entrepreneurs Roundtable Accelerator  New York City Pedro J. Pizarro (2009)    Edison International David E. I. Pyott, CBE (2018) Private InvestorEduardo A. Repetto (2015)   Avantis Investors Thomas F. Rosenbaum (2014)  President  Sonja and William Davidow  Presidential Chair  and Professor of Physics  California Institute of Technology Richard H. Scheller (2014) Timothy J. Sloan (2016) Senior Advisor and Partner Fortress Investments, LLC Mason Smith (2021)Donald W. Tang (2005)  Founding Partner Tang Media Partners David W. Thompson (2012)    (Retired)  Orbital ATK Richmond A. Wolf (2018)  Partner Capitol World Investors  SENIOR TRUSTEES(with date of first election and date of election as Senior Trustee) Gordon M. Binder (1995, 2007)  Managing Director  Coastview CapitalRobert C. Bonner (2008, 2014) Senior Partner Sentinel HS Group, LLC Lynn A. Booth (2011)  The Otis Booth FoundationMilton M. Chang (2005, 2015) Managing Director  Incubic Venture Capital Peggy T. Cherng (2012, 2019)   Co-Chairman  Panda Restaurant Group France Cordova (2020)   Former Director, National Science  Foundation President Emerita, Purdue University William H. Davidow (1996, 2007) Founding Partner Mohr Davidow Ventures Thomas E. Everhart (1998, 2004) President Emeritus   California Institute of Technology Narendra K. Gupta (2010, 2020)  Managing Director  Nexus Venture Partners B. Kipling Hagopian (2012, 2013) Managing Partner Apple Oaks Partners LLCFrederick J. Hameetman (2006, 2012)  Chairman Cal-AmericanMaria D. Hummer-Tuttle (2012, 2016)  Chair Emerita J. Paul Getty Trust Bobby R. Inman (1989, 2003) Professor, Lyndon B. Johnson  Centennial Chair in National Policy The University of Texas at Austin Robert T. Jenkins (2005, 2015) Kent Kresa (1994, 2010)  Chair EmeritusChairman Emeritus Northrop Grumman Corporation Ronald K. Linde (1989, 2012) Independent Investor; Chair, The Ronald and Maxine Linde  Foundation; Founder/Former Chief Executive  A. Michael Lipper (2005, 2007)   Lipper Advisory ServicesShirley M. Malcom (1999, 2018) Senior Advisor and Director of SEA  Change American Association for the Advancement of ScienceRichard N. Merkin (2007, 2018)   Heritage Provider Network Michael G. Mullen (2019) President  MGM Consulting LLCPatrick H. Nettles, Jr. (1998, 2015)  Executive Chairman Ciena CorporationPeter Norton (2006, 2015) Ronald L. Olson (1998, 2013) Senior Partner Munger, Tolles & Olson LLP Stephen R. Onderdonk (1986, 2016)    (Retired)  Econolite Control Products, Inc. Stewart A. Resnick (2005, 2008) Chairman and President  The Wonderful Company Charles R. Trimble (2002, 2013)  Founder and Former Chief Executive  Trimble Navigation Ltd. Lewis W. van Amerongen (2004, 2012)  LvA Enterprises, Inc.Suzanne H. Woolsey (2006, 2013)  Corporate Governance Consultant LIFE MEMBERS(with date of first election and date of election as Life Member)George L. Argyros (1992, 2008)    Donald L. Bren (1983, 2004)  Chairman of the Board  Irvine CompanyJohn E. Bryson (2005, 2017)Harry M. Conger (1985, 2006)   Emeritus Homestake Mining CompanyCamilla C. Frost (1977, 2007)  Trustee of the Chandler Trust  (Retired)  Arthur L. Goldstein (1995, 2012)  (Retired)  Ionics, IncorporatedPhilip M. Hawley (1975, 1997) Chairman P. M. Hawley, Inc. York Liao (1997, 2018)  Managing Director  Winbridge Company Ltd.Gordon E. Moore (1983, 2009)  Chair Emeritus Chairman Emeritus Intel CorporationSidney R. Petersen (1980, 2007)  (Retired)  Getty Oil CompanyNelson C. Rising (2006, 2019) Chairman Rising Realty PartnersArthur Rock (1988, 1998) Principal Arthur Rock and CompanyBenjamin M. Rosen (1986, 2005) Chair Emeritus Chairman Emeritus Compaq Computer Corporation741Historical Sketch741Board of Trustees Richard M. Rosenberg (1989, 2007)   (Retired)  Bank of America CorporationRobert J. Schultz (1991, 2002) Vice Chairman (Retired)  General Motors Corporation Marc I. Stern (2004, 2017)  Chairman The TCW Group, Inc. Walter L. Weisman (1988, 2021)  Past Chairman and  American Medical International, Inc. Virginia V. Weldon (1996, 2010)  Senior Vice President for Public Policy  (Retired)  Monsanto CompanyGayle E. Wilson (1995, 2020)  HONORARY LIFE MEMBER Betty I. Moore (2009)  Co-Founder Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation STANDING COMMITTEES Executive CommitteeŠD. L. Lee*,  Chair; R. K. Linde*, Vice Chair; R.  Belldegrun, J.C. Campagna, R. B.  Chess*, J. B. Kutler*, T. W. Lawrence*,  S. M. Malcom*, D. D. McWhinney*,  A. R. Mehran, Sr.*, T. F. Rosenbaum*,   Timothy J. Sloan*, D. W. Thompson*, S.  H. Woolsey*; At Large Members: B. M.  Bren , W. H. Davidow , J. S. Friedman,  B. R. Inman, L.D. James; K. Kresa,  A. Lidow, P. M. Neches; Consulting  Participants: G. E. Moore, B. M. Rosen,  G. E. Wilson; Standing Attendees: D. A.  Bailey, Jr., K. M. Gilmartin, D. Jergovic,  C. A. Light, J. T. Lum, S. H. Richland, M.  Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell Audit and Compliance CommitteeŠD.  W. Thompson, Chair; R. C. Bonner, Vice  Chair; W. H. Ahmanson, L. Kirkbride,  D. L. Lee*, A. Lidow, R. K. Linde, A. M.  Lipper, D. D. McWhinney, P. M. Neches,  S. R. Onderdonk; Standing Attendees:  S. Atlee, D. A. Bailey, Jr., M. W. Brewer,  L. D. James, D. Jergovic, S. A. Kayali,  P. D. Koyzis, C. A. Light, J. T. Lum,  S. E. Patterson, S. H. Richland, T. F.  Rosenbaum, M. Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell Conflict Review Subcommittee [A  subcommittee of ACC Committee]ŠD.  W. Thompson, Chair ex officio; J. C.  Campagna, R. B. Chess, J. B. Kutler, R.  K. Linde, P. M. Neches, P. Norton, S. R.  Onderdonk; Standing Attendees: C. A.  Light, J. T. Lum Buildings and Grounds  CommitteeŠA. R. Mehran, Sr., Chair;  K. G. Moore, Vice Chair; L. M. Dyer, T.  E. Everhart, R. T. Jenkins, D. L. Lee*,  S. R. Onderdonk, P. J. Pizarro, T. F.  Rosenbaum*, L. W. van Amerongen;  Standing Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., K.  M. Gilmartin, K. Hargreaves, D. Jergovic,  C. A. Light, J. T. Lum, J. S. Onderdonk,  S. H. Richland, M. Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell Business and Finance CommitteeŠS.  H. Woolsey, Chair; P. J. Pizarro, Vice  Chair; B. M. Barrett, F. Còrdova, T.  E. Everhart, P. D. Kaufman, W. G.  Kortschak, K. Kresa, T. W. Lawrence,  D. L. Lee *, A. Lidow, R. K. Linde,  A. M. Lipper, S. M. Malcom, D. D.  McWhinney, K. G. Moore, P. M. Neches,  T. F. Rosenbaum*, D. W. Tang, L. W.  van Amerongen, R. A. Wolf; Consulting  Participant: H. M. Conger; Standing  Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., D. Jergovic,  S. A. Kayali, C. A. Light, J. T. Lum, J.  M. McCallin, S. E. Patterson, S. H.  Richland, M. Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell Development CommitteeŠJ. C.  Campagna, Chair; E. A. Repetto, Vice  Chair; L. A. Booth, P. T. Cherng,  W.  H. Davidow,  M. D. Hummer-Tuttle,  R. T. Jenkins, P. D. Kaufman, W. G.  Kortschak, K. Kresa, D. L. Lee*, M. J.  Mathews-Spradlin, D. D. McWhinney, T.  F. Rosenbaum*, D. W. Tang, R. A. Wolf;  Standing Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., S.  M. Chabner, M. R. Clark, D. Jergovic,  C. A. Light, J. T. Lum, S. H. Richland,  D. A. Tirrell Executive Compensation  CommitteeŠ T. W. Lawrence,  Chair;  R. K. Linde, Vice Chair; B. M. Barrett,  G. B. Jones, D. L. Lee*, A. Lidow, S.  M. Malcom, P. M. Neches; Standing  Attendees: C. A. Light, J. M. McCallin, T.  F. Rosenbaum Institute and Alumni Relations  CommitteeŠS. M. Malcom, Chair;  E. A. Repetto, Vice Chair; W. H.  Davidow, L. M. Dyer, W. T. Gross, R. T.  Jenkins, L. Kirkbride, D. L. Lee*, M. J.  742Trustees, Administration, Faculty Mathews-Spradlin, P. M. Neches, S. R.  Onderdonk, T. F. Rosenbaum*; Ex Officio  Standing Attendees: Alumni Association  President, Caltech Fund Chair, Caltech  Associates President, Faculty Chair;  Standing Attendees: R. E. Amos, D. A.  Bailey, Jr., D. Binney, S. M. Chabner, M.  R. Clark, K. M. Gilmartin, K. Hargreaves,  D. Jergovic, C. A. Light, J. T. Lum, S. H.  Richland, M. Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell  Investment CommitteeŠT. J. Sloan,  Chair; R. K. Linde, Vice Chair; J. S.  Friedman, G. B. Jones, D. L. Lee*, Li Lu,  A. M. Lipper, T. F. Rosenbaum*; Advisory  Participants: S. Schnabel, L. N. West;  Standing Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., C.  A. Light, S. H. Richland, M. Steurbaut,  D. A. Tirrell, P. I. Wang Jet Propulsion Laboratory  CommitteeŠJ. B. Kutler, Chair; M.  G. Mullen, Vice Chair; S. Bailey, B. M.  Barrett, R. C. Bonner, D. E. Chavez, F.  Còrdova, D. T. Dreier, L. M. Dyer, T. E.  Everhart, F. J. Hameetman, B. R. Inman,  L. Kirkbride, T. W. Lawrence, D. L. Lee*,  Li Lu, M. J. Mathews-Spradlin, D. D.  McWhinney, A. R. Mehran, Sr., R. N.  Merkin, P. M. Neches, P. Norton, R. L.  Olson, S. R. Onderdonk, D. E. I. Pyott,  S. A. Resnick, T. F. Rosenbaum*, D. W.  Thompson, C. R. Trimble, R. A. Wolf,  S. H. Woolsey; Consulting Participants:  G. E. Moore , G. E. Wilson; Standing  Attendees: S. Atlee, D. A. Bailey, Jr.,  D. B. Gallagher, K. Hargreaves, L. D.  James, D. Jergovic, C. A. Light, J. T.  Lum, S. H. Richland, M. Steurbaut, D.  A. Tirrell JPL Governance Subcommittee  [A  subcommittee of the JPL Committee]  ŒJ. B. Kutler, Chair ex officio; M. G.  Mullen, Vice Chair; B. M. Barrett, B.  R. Inman, K. Kresa, T. W. Lawrence,  D. L. Lee*, T. F. Rosenbaum*, D. W.  Thompson*; Standing Attendees: L. D.  James, D. Jergovic, P. D. Koyzis, C. A.  Light, J. T. Lum, M. Steurbaut, D. A.  Tirrell Nominating CommitteeŠR.  Belldegrun, Chair; B. M. Bren, Vice  Chair; A. Lidow, Vice Chair; S. Bailey, B.  M. Barrett, L. A. Booth, J. S. Chen, N. K.  Gupta, D. D. Ho, M. D. Hummer-Tuttle,  B. R. Inman, G. B. Jones, L. Kirkbride,  D. L. Lee*, R. K. Linde, M. J. Mathews-Spradlin, D. D. McWhinney, R. N.  Merkin, R. L. Olson, T. F. Rosenbaum*,  D. W. Tang, R. A. Wolf, S. H. Woolsey;  Consulting Participants: V. V. Weldon,  G. E. Wilson; Standing Attendees: D.  A. Bailey, Jr., B. Fegan, D. Jergovic, C.  A. Light, J. T. Lum, S. H. Richland, D.  A. Tirrell Student Experience CommitteeŠD.  D. McWhinney, Chair; D. E. Chavez,  R. B. Chess, L. M. Dyer, W. T. Gross,  R. T. Jenkins, L. Kirkbride, D. L. Lee*,  S. M. Malcom; M. G. Mullen, P. M.  Neches, P. H. Nettles Jr., P. Norton, T.  F. Rosenbaum*, R. H. Scheller, D. W.  Thompson, C. R. Trimble, S. H. Woolsey;  Consulting Participant: V. V. Weldon;  Standing Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., D.  Chan, K. L. Gilmartin, D. Jergovic, C. A.  Light, J. T. Lum, L. Nye, S. H. Richland,  D. A. Tirrell, C. A. Weinstein; Student  Advisory Participants: PendingTechnology Transfer Committee ŠR.  B. Chess, Chair, R. A. Wolf, Vice Chair;  R. Belldegrun, D. E. Chavez, P. T.  Cherng, D. T. Dreier, L. M. Dyer, W. T.  Gross, N. K. Gupta, B. K. Hagopian,  D. D. Ho, R. T. Jenkins, L. Kirkbride,  W. G. Kortschak, J. B. Kutler, D. L.  Lee*, P. M. Neches, P. H. Nettles, Jr., P.  Norton, D. E. I. Pyott, S. A. Resnick, T. F.  Rosenbaum*, R. H. Scheller, D. W. Tang,  C. R. Trimble, L. W. van Amerongen;  Consulting Participant: A. L. Goldstein;  Standing Attendees: D. A. Bailey, Jr., K.  Bhattacharya, F. Farina, D. Jergovic, C.  A. Light, J. T. Lum, S. H. Richland, M.  Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell *ex officio member 743Historical Sketch743Board of Trustees ADMINISTRATIVE  OFFICERSSteven Atlee Deputy General CounselDexter A. Bailey, Jr.  Vice President for Advancement and  Alumni RelationsKaushik Bhattacharya Vice Provost   Chair of the FacultyShayna M. Chabner David C. Chan Dean of Graduate StudiesJin Chang Michelle R. Clark Associate Vice President  for Development  Vice Provost Frederic Farina  Chief Innovation and Corporate Grace C. Fisher-Adams   Kevin M. Gilmartin  Kenneth Hargreaves  Assistant Vice President, Strategy  Implementation and External Relations  General Larry D. James Deputy Director, Interim Vice President  and Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory Diana Jergovic Vice President,  Strategy ImplementationPamela D. Koyzis Associate Vice President of Audit Ser -vices and Institute ComplianceCathy A. Light Secretary, Board of Trustees Jennifer T. Lum  General CounselLindsey E. Malcom-Piqueux Assistant Vice President of Diversity,  Equity, Inclusion and Assessment David J. Mayo Senior Director of Research Adminis -trationJulia M. McCallin Associate Vice President for  Human Resources Lesley Nye Interim Dean of Undergraduate  StudentsJohn S. Onderdonk  Interim Associate Vice President for  FacilitiesSharon E. Patterson  Associate Vice President for Finance  and Treasurer Scott H. Richland Carol J. Schuil  Executive Assistant to the President,  and Assistant Secretary, Board of  Trustees Margo Steurbaut Vice President of Administration and  CHAIRS OF DIVISIONSHarry A. Atwater Engineering and Applied ScienceDennis A. Dougherty Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringJohn P. Grotzinger   Geological and Planetary SciencesFiona A. Harrison Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy 744Trustees, Administration, Faculty Thomas F.  Rosenbaum President David A. Tirrell  ProvostRichard M. Murray  Biology and Biological EngineeringJean-Laurent Rosenthal   Humanities and Social SciencesADMINISTRATIVE  COMMITTEES Animal Care and Use  [fills the role of  Caltech™s Institutional Animal Care and  Use CommitteeŠIACUC]Š(Reports to the Vice Provost for Research)ŠR.  A. Andersen, Chair, M. Meister, Vice  Chair; J. Brackman, J. Campbell (alter-nate), G. Fisher-Adams, H. Heinen,  (alternate), E. Hisserich (alternate),  L. C. Hsieh-Wilson, K. C. Lencioni*, C. Lois (alternate), D. J. Mayo*, L. E.  Quenee*, J. Scapa*, C. W. Scislowicz*  (alternate), T. Shirey, N. Singh (alter -nate), Advisor: J. T. Lum (or her des -ignee)Benefits (Reports to the Vice President  of Administration and Chief Financial  Officer)ŠP. T. Hoffman, Chair; A.  Boladian, K. Bradshaw*, B. Clemons, R.  Fradet, C. Hart*, M. Jaross*, A. Leonard,  L. Livesay, J. M. McCallin*, L. Moffit*,  S. E. Patterson*, R. M. Roessler*, A. I.  Sargent, S. Scoville Biosafety [fills the role of Caltech™s  Institutional Biosafety CommitteeŒŒIBC] (Reports to the Provost)ŒŒJ.  D. Leadbetter, Chair; A. Aravin, S.  Chatterjee, C. Cortese, A. Grossman,  F. Hanner, E. Hisserich, A. Hoelz  (alternate), R. Ismagilov, K. Lencioni*,  D. J. Mayo, L. Quenee*, J. Scapa* (alternate), C. Scislowicz*, T. Shirey, N.  Singh (alternate), Advisor: J. T. Lum (or  her designee)Committee on Classified Research  and Publication Restrictions at JPL (Reports to the President)ŠD.  I. Meiron, Chair; D. Gallagher, R.  Murray, T. A. Prince, M. Simons, P. O.  Wennberg, J. Zmuidzinas Computing Advisory Committee (Reports to the Provost and the Vice  President of Administration and Chief  Financial Officer)ŠM. Spiropulu,  Chair; K. Bhattacharya*, G. K. Chan, J. Chang*, T. Colonius, M. Hari⁄, C. Horii,  E. O™Reilly§, S. E. Patterson*, Z. Ross, M. S. Shum, L. QianCommittee on Undergraduate  Education (Reports to the Provost)ŠC. A. Weinstein*, Chair;  K. Batygin, G. Blake, W. Brown*, K.  M. Gilmartin, C. Horii, M. Okumura, C. Parker, D. Prober, G. Refael, C.  Salinas*, M. Wang* Environmental Health and Safety  (Reports to the President)ŒŒD. A.  Tirrell, Chair; K. Bhattacharya, J. S.  Onderdonk*,K. M. Gilmartin, P. D.  Koyzis*, C. Scislowicz*, M. SteurbautInstitute Academic Council (IACC)ŠDavid A. Tirrell, Chair; H. A. Atwater,  D. A. Dougherty, J. P. Grotzinger, F.  Harrison, R. Murray, T. F. Rosenbaum,  J-L RosenthalInstitute Administrative Council  (IAC)ŠT. F. Rosenbaum, Chair; S.  Atlee, H. A. Atwater, D. Bailey, K.  Bhattacharya, G. Blake, S. Chabner,  D. Chan, J. Chang, M. Clark, D.  Dougherty, F. Farina, G. Fisher-Adams,  K. M. Gilmartin, J. P. Grotzinger, K.  Hargreaves, F. A. Harrison, L. D. James,  D. Jergovic, P. D. Koyzis, C. A. Light, J.  T. Lum, L. Malcom-Piqueux, D. Mayo,  J. M. McCallin, R. Murray, L. Nye, J.  Onderdonk, S. E. Patterson, S. H.  Richland, J-L Rosenthal, C. Schuil, M.  Steurbaut, D. A. Tirrell, C. A. Weinstein Institute Art (Reports to the  President)ŠT. Schneider, Chair, J-P  Avouac, J. Buchwald, P. Collopy*, M.  Elowitz, K. T. Faber, K. Hargreaves*, D.  Kremers, P. Perona President™s Diversity Council  (Reports to the President through the  Provost)ŠW. M. Clemons, Jr., Chair,  A. Emami, J. P. Grotzinger,, D. Hsieh,  L. Malcom-Piqueux, V. J. Orphan, R.  Ravichandran, B. Stolz, C. Weinstein*,  N. Wey-Gomez, B. Wold Protection of Human Subjects [fills the role of Caltech™s Institutional  Review BoardŠIRB] (Reports to  the Vice Provost for Research)ŠR.  Adolphs, Chair; C. Yang, Vice Chair; R.  A. Andersen, J. Ensminger, M. Ewens,  G. Fisher-Adams, M. J. Gibson,  J. Gumer, E. Hisserich (alternate),  M. Manzanares, L. Quenee*, C. W.  Scislowicz*, T. Shirey, N. Singh (alter -nate), J. M. Tyszka*, Advisor: J. T. Lum  (or her designee)Radiation Safety (Reports to the Vice  President of Administration and Chief  Financial Officer)ŠD. S. Burnet, Chair;  B. W. Filippone, Vice Chair; B. Fultz, H.  Issaian*, A. Kumagai, C. Scislowicz*,  S. Shan745Historical Sketch745Administrative Officers 746Trustees, Administration, Faculty SURF (Reports to the Provost)ŠR.  Murray, Chair, G. Blake, M. Bronner, D.  Crewell*, K. M. Gilmartin*, M. Gonzalez*,  E. Mantovan, A. Ponce, M. B. Robbins*,  C. Rypisi*, B. Stolz, T. Tisch*   * ex officio member ƒ representing graduate students ⁄ representing undergraduate students § representing postdoctoral scholars FACULTY OFFICERS  AND COMMITTEES 2021Œ22Officers  Chair: G. A. Blake, 2022Vice Chair: E. Rothenberg, 2022 Secretary: B. M. Stoltz, 2023 Faculty Board K. Batygin, 2022C. Daraio, 2023J. M. Eiler, 2023 A. Emami, 2022G. C. Fu, 2024B. Fultz, 2024D. Gilmore, 2022 S. Golwala, 2024A. Hoelz, 2022L. C. Hsieh-Wilson, 2023J. Jahner, 2024 M. Marcolli, 2023 C. Martin, 2023M. Meister, 2022 L. S. Pachter, 2024 S. Pellegrino, 2023F. C. Porter, 2022 G. R. Rossman, 2022M. Zernicka-Goetz, 2024 Ex Officio: H. A. AtwaterD. C. ChanD. A. DoughertyK. M. GilmartinJ. P. Grotzinger F. A. Harrison R. M. MurrayL. NyeT. F. Rosenbaum J-L. RosenthalD. A. Tirrell SteeringG. A. Blake, Chair, 2022 E. Rothenberg, Vice Chair, 2022 B. M. Stoltz, Secretary, 2023 K. Bhattacharya*C. Daraio, 2022M. Effros* D. Gilmore, 2022 C. Martin, 2022M. Meister, 2022 S. Pellegrino, 2022D. A. Tirrell* Academic Freedom and Tenure D. L. Kormos-Buchwald, 2023A. J. Minnich, 2022K. Batygin, 2022S. L. Mayo 2023B. J. McKeon, 2023C. M. Umans, 2022Academic Policies C. S. Parker, Chair, 2024 F. Eberhardt, 2024 P. Schroeder, 2024 Athletics and Physical EducationT. K. Dennison, Chair, 2022 J. S. Bois, 2024M. E. Brown, 2022 J. Fuller, 2023 B. Mitchell*A. M. Pallie*B. M. Stoltz, 2024K. M. Zuev, 2023 ConvocationsW. C. Brown, Chair, 2023 D. C. Chan*L. Nye*D. Ramakrishnan, 2024 Core Curriculum Steering M. Okumura, Chair, 2024 A. Blank, 2024M. E. Brown, 2023 C. W. Cheung, 2024 F. M. Echenique, 2023 C. Jurca, 2023 N. H. Katz, 2023L. Nye*C. Salinas*A. Wierman, 2024K. G. Zinn, 2022CurriculumG. Refael, Chair, 2022 T. Agapie, 2024 D. I. Meiron, 2023 L. Nye*L. S. Pachter, 2023 E. M. Rains, 2022C. Salinas*A. F. Thompson, 2022 *ex officio member 747Historical Sketch747Committee on Exchange Programs  and Study Abroad (CEPSA) H. B. Newman, Chair, 2024 J. F. Adkins, 2024 F. Brandao, 2024 C. Daraio, 2023M. D. Dykstra, 2024I. Peter, 2023 S. R. Quartz, 2022C. Salinas*P. Schroeder, 2023 L. B. Stolper*Foreign Students and Scholars  A. Hoelz, Chair, 2024 Y. Abu-Mostafa, 2024 C. Daraio, 2024C. Frankenberg, 2022 D. Mawet, 2023I. Smith*Y. Xin 2023 M. Zernicka-Goetz, 2023 Freshman Admissions and Financial  AidJ. R. Leadbetter, Chair, 2022 J. L. Beauchamp, 2024A. Blank, 2023G. Blanquart, 2023J. Callies, 2024C. F. Camerer, 2022 M. A. Chang*X. Chen, 2023J. Cvitanic, 2024S. G. Djorgovski, 2024 W. G. Dunphy, 2024 R. C. Flagan, 2024G. A. George, 2022 D. Gilmore, 2024 L. A. Goentoro, 2024 J. R. Greer, 2024 L. Hillenbrand, 2022J. Kirschvink, 2022K. G. Libbrecht, 2024 M. Meister, 2023 L. Nye*A. M. Pallie*C. S. Parker, 2024 S. R. Quartz, 2024M. C. Vanier, 2024 D. P. Weitekamp, 2024 B. P. Wernicke, 2024 A. Wierman, 2024Graduate StudiesN. Lapusta*, ChairA. D. Ames*L. Cai*D. C. Chan*W. M. Clemons* K. T. Faber* A. Faraon*C. Frankenberg* K. P. Giapis* N. Gilmore (non-voting) L. Hillenbrand*A. V. Hirsch* V. Kostina* H. A. Lester*D. I. Meiron* Y. Ni* J. P. O™Doherty* R. B. Patterson*D. Prober* P. Schroeder* A. G. Siapas*B. M. Stoltz*A. F. Thompson* C. M. Umans*L. Wang* Y. Yue* HealthH. A. Lester, Chair, 2022 J. L. Beauchamp, 2022D. C. Chan*J. L. Howes*A. P. Ingersoll, 2022 C. Jurca, 2023 E. Mantovan, 2024J. M. McCallin*B. Mitchell*L. Nye*Institute Programs J. M. Eiler, 2023 D. A. Bailey*B. Brophy* J. Cvitanic, 2023L. C. Hsieh-Wilson, 2022L. S. Pachter, 2022 P. Perona, 2024 LibraryB. A. Hay, Chair, 2022 C. E. Bucholz, 2022B. Fultz, 2023W. A. Goddard, 2022 H. B. Newman, 2024M. S. Shum, 2023K. Whatley*Membership and BylawsE. Rothenberg, Chair, 2022 D. Asimaki, 2024R. C. Flagan, 2022S. R. Kulkarni, 2023 G. W. Pigman III, 2022 J. M. Stock, 2024B. M. Stoltz*NominatingG. R. Rossman, Chair, 2022 C. Daraio, 2023T. K. Dennison, 2022 E. S. Phinney, 2022 B. M. Stoltz*K. G. Zinn, 2023Faculty Officers and Committees *ex officio member Patents and Relations with IndustryJ. O. Dabiri, Chair, 2023 A. Emami, 2023M. Guttman, 2023K. See, 2024B. M. Stoltz, 2022C. Yang, 2022 Postdoctoral ScholarsK. Bhattacharya, ChairJ. F. Alicea K. BatyginG. K. ChanP. F. Hopkins A. KechrisJ. P. O™Doherty L. S. PachterA. Santana*C. M. UmansStudent Life and HousingA. Rangel, Chair, 2023 D. Asimaki, 2023D. C. Chan*J. M. Jackson, 2023T. N. Mannion (non-voting) B. Mitchell*L. Nye*R. B. Patterson, 2024E. S. Phinney, 2022 Undergraduate Academic Standards  and HonorsW. C. Brown, Chair, 2022 R. C. Flagan, 2022M. Guttman, 2024N. R. Hutzler, 2024 J. M. Jackson, 2022L. Nye*R. B. Patterson, 2024S. Pellegrino, 2022C. Salinas*K. C. Schwab, 2022Upperclass Admissions D. Asimaki, Chair, 2022 B. W. Filippone, 2024 J. A. Jahner, 2022 B. J. McKeon, 2022C. Salinas*D. P. Weitekamp, 2022 Y. L. Yung, 2022 *ex officio member 748Trustees, Administration, Faculty 749STAFF OF  INSTRUCTION  AND RESEARCHDIVISION OF BIOLOGY AND BIOLOGICAL ENGINEERINGRichard M. Murray, Ph.D.  William K. Bowes Jr. Leadership Chair Pamela J. Bjorkman, Ph.D. Michael H. Dickinson, Ph.D. Dianne Newman, Ph.D. Niles Pierce, Ph.D.  Professors Emeriti John N. Abelson, Ph.D. George Beadle Professor of Biology Charles J. Brokaw, Ph.D.  Biology Roscoe G. Dickinson Professor of  Chemistry and BiologyMelvin I. Simon, Ph.D. Anne P. and Benjamin F. Biaggini  Professor of Biological Sciences James H. Strauss, Ph.D. Ethel Wilson Bowles and Robert Bowles Professor of Biology Professors  Ralph Adolphs, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Psychology,  Neuroscience, and Biology John M. Allman, Ph.D. Frank P. Hixon Professor of  Neurobiology Richard A. Andersen, Ph.D.  James G. Boswell Professor of  Neuroscience; T&C Brain-Machine  Interface Leadership Chair; Director, T&C Brain-Machine  Interface CenterDavid J. Anderson, Ph.D.1 Seymour Benzer Professor of  Biology; Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute for Neuroscience Leadership  Chair; Director, Tianqiao and  Chrissy Chen Institute for Neuroscience Alexei A. Aravin, Ph.D. Biology, Frances H. Arnold, Ph.D., Nobel  Laureate  Linus Pauling Professor of Chemical  Engineering, Bioengineering, and Biochemistry; Director, Donna and  Benjamin M. Rosen Bioengineering CenterDavid Baltimore, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.,  D.Phil.h.c., Nobel Laureate  President Emeritus; Distinguished  Professor of Biology Pamela J. Bjorkman, Ph.D. David Baltimore Professor of Biology  and Bioengineering; Merkin Institute  and Biological EngineeringMarianne Bronner, Ph.D.  Distinguished Professor of Biology;  Director of the Beckman Institute Long Cai, Ph.D. Biology and Biological EngineeringJudith L. Campbell, Ph.D. Chemistry and BiologyDavid C. Chan, M.D., Ph.D. Biology Michael H. Dickinson, Ph.D. Esther M. and Abe M. Zarem Professor  of Bioengineering and Aeronautics,   Biological EngineeringWilliam G. Dunphy, Ph.D.  Grace C. Steele Professor of Biology Michael Elowitz, Ph.D.1 Biology and BioengineeringLea Goentoro, Ph.D.  BiologyViviana Gradinaru, Ph.D.  Neuroscience and Biological  Engineering; Director,  Center for Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience Mitchell Guttman, Ph.D. Biology749Biology and Biological Engineering1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute 750Trustees, Administration, Faculty Bruce A. Hay, Ph.D.  BiologyRustem F. Ismagilov, Ph.D.  Ethel Wilson Bowles and Robert Bowles Professor of Chemistry  and Chemical Engineering; Director  of the Jacobs Institute for Molecular Engineering for MedicineGrant J. Jensen, Ph.D. Biophysics and Biology Mary B. Kennedy, Ph.D.  Allen and Lenabelle Davis Professor  of BiologyHenry A. Lester, Ph.D.  BiologyStephen L. Mayo, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Biology and  Chemistry; Merkin Institute Professor Sarkis Mazmanian, Ph.D. Luis B. and Nelly Soux Professor  of Microbiology Markus Meister, Ph.D.  Anne P. and Benjamin F. Biaggini  Professor of Biological Sciences Elliot M. Meyerowitz, Ph.D. 1 George W. Beadle Professor  of BiologyRichard Murray, Ph.D.  Thomas E. and Doris Everhart Profes -sor of Control and Dynamical Systems  and Bioengineering; William K. Bowes Jr. Leadership Chair, Division of Biology  and Biological EngineeringDianne K. Newman, Ph.D. Gordon M. Binder/Amgen Professor  of Biology and Geobiology; Executive EngineeringYuki Oka, Ph.D.  Biology; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute Victoria J. Orphan, Ph.D.  James Irvine Professor of Environmen -tal Science and Geobiolgy; Allen V.C.  Davis and Lenabelle Davis Leadership Chair, Center for Microbial Interac -tions; Director, Center for Microbial  InteractionsLior S. Pachter, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Computational  Biology and Computing and Mathematical SciencesRobert B. Phillips, Ph.D. Fred and Nancy Morris Professor of  Biophysics, Biology, and Physics Niles A. Pierce, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied and Computa -tional Mathematics and Bioengineer-Biological EngineeringDavid Prober, Ph.D.  BiologyLulu Qian, Ph.D. BioengineeringEllen Rothenberg, Ph.D. Distinguished Professor of Biology Michael L. Roukes, Ph.D. Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics,  Applied Physics, and BioengineeringShinsuke Shimojo, Ph.D. Gertrude Baltimore Professor of  Experimental PsychologyAthanassios G. Siapas, Ph.D. Computation and Neural SystemsAngelike Stathopoulos, Ph.D. BiologyPaul W. Sternberg, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Biology Doris Ying Tsao, Ph.D. 1 Biology; T&C Chen Center for Systems Neuroscience Leadership  Chair; Director, T&C Chen Center  for Systems Neuroscience Alexander J. Varshavsky, Ph.D.  Thomas Hunt Morgan Professor   of Cell BiologyErik Winfree, Ph.D.  Professor of Computer Science,  Computation and Neural Systems, and BioengineeringBarbara J. Wold, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Molecular Biology Changhuei Yang, Ph.D.  Thomas G. Myers Professor of  Electrical Engineering, Bioengineering, and Medical EngineeringMagdalena Zernicka-Goetz, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute Kai Zinn, Ph.D. Howard and Gwen Laurie Smits  Professor of Biology Assistant Professors Elizabeth J. Hong, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Neuroscience;  Chen ScholarJoseph Parker, Ph.D.  Biology and Biological EngineeringMatt Thomson, Ph.D.  Computational Biology; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute David Van Valen, Ph.D.  Biology and Biological Engineering, In-vestigator, Heritage Medical Research  InstituteRebecca M. Voorhees, Ph.D.  Biology and Biological Engineering; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute Kaihang Wang, Ph.D.  Biology and Biological EngineeringSenior Research Associate Emeriti Anne Chomyn, Ph.D.Ellen G. Strauss, Ph.D.R. Andrew Cameron, Ph.D. Lecturers  Lindsay Bremner, Ph.D.  Andres Collazo, Ph.D. Roman A. Corfas, Ph.D. Julie Hoy, Ph.D.  Danny Petrasek, M.D., Ph.D.Ueli Rutishauser, Ph.D.  Carol Chace Tydell, D.V.M Research Professors Tsui-Fen Chou, Ph.D. Katalin Fejes Toth, M.D., Ph.D.  David M. Glover, Ph.D.  Akiko Kumagai, Ph.D. Carlos Lois, M.D., Ph.D.Isabelle S. Peter Lashgari Faghani, Ph.D. Daniel A. Wagenaar, Ph.D. Research Assistant Professor  Alina Patke, Ph.D.Teaching Professor Justin S. Bois, Ph.D. Senior Faculty Associate Alice S. Huang, Ph.D.  Moore Distinguished Scholar   Bingni Wen Brunton, Ph.D. Visiting Associates Vasileios Nikolaos Christopoulos, Ph.D. Jason Chu, Ph.D.Raymond Deshaies, Ph.D.Wael El-Nachef, Ph.D. Pamela Eversole-Cire, Ph.D Maxellende Ezin, Ph.D.Jordi Garcia-Ojalvo, Ph.D. Elaine Hsiao, Ph.DCollin Kieffer, Ph.D. Brian Lee, M.D., Ph.D.Carmel Levitan, Ph.D.Charles Liu, M.D., Ph.D.Uri Maoz, Ph.D.Derrick Morton, Ph.D.Carmie Puckett Robinson, M.D.Animesh Ray, Ph.D. Carol W. Readhead, Ph.D. Ueli Rutishauser, Ph.D. Luis Oscar Sanchez Guardado, Ph.D. Daniel Schwartz, M.D.Mohammad Hassan Abdelrahman Shehata, Ph.D.Amber Stubler, Ph.D. Tsu-Te Judith Su, Ph.D. Armand R. Tanguay, Ph.D. Michael Waterman, Ph.D. Members of the Professional Staff  Tyson Aflalo, Ph.D. Igor Antoshechkin, Ph.D.Stijn Cassenaer, Ph.D. Siyu Chen, Ph.D.Andres Collazo, Ph.D. Rochelle A. Diamond, B.A.Ali Khoshnan, Ph.D.Evgueniy V. Lubenov, Ph.D. Kaushiki Menon, Ph.D.Hans-Michael Muller, Ph.D. Ker-hwa Ou, M.S. Kimberly Van Auken, Ph.D. Jost Vielmetter, Ph.D. Anthony P. West, Jr., Ph.D. 751Historical Sketchb751Biology and Biological Engineering1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute Senior Postdoctoral ScholarsLuke Bashford, Ph.D. Andrew Flyak, Ph.D. Walter Gabriel Gonzalez, Ph.D. Ulrich Herget, Ph.D.Erica Hutchins, Ph.D.Lu Liu, Ph.D.Frank Macabenta, Ph.D.Brittany Dawn Needham, Ph.D.Georg Oberhofer, Ph.D. Nicolas Pelaez Restrepo, Ph.D. Michael Louis Piacentino, Ph.D.Ivo Ros, Ph.D.Liang She, Ph.D.Fabai Wu, Ph.D. Postdoctoral ScholarsZsuzsa Akos, Ph.D.Reinaldo Alcalde, Ph.D.Michael Anaya, Ph.D.Andrey Andreev Ph.D. Aswini Babu, Ph.D.Min Bao, Ph.D.Amir H. Behbahani, Ph.D.Kallol Bera, Ph.D.David Bjanes, Ph.D.Máté Borsos, Ph.D.John Bostick Ph.D.Adrian Brueckner, Ph.D. Katherine Brugman, Ph.D.Elsy C. Buitrago Delgado, Ph.D.Mengyi Cao, Ph.D.Irene Caprara, Ph.D. Kate Cavanaugh, Ph.D.Cynthia Chai, Ph.D.Yogaditya Chakrabarty, Ph.D. Dong-Yuan Chen, Ph.D. Natalie Chen, Ph.D.Zibo Chen, Ph.D.Kai-Wen Cheng, Ph.D. Hui Chiu, Ph.D.George Chreifi, Ph.D. Alexander Cohen, Ph.D.Kurt M. Dahlstrom, Ph.D. Daniel Dar, Ph.D. Carla De Agostini Verna, Ph.D. 1Ayyappa Raja Desingu Rajan, Ph.D. Kristina Verena Dylla, Ph.D. Haruka Ebisu, Ph.D.Brittany Edens, Ph.D.Chee Huat Eng, Ph.D.Chengcheng Fan, Ph.D.Christopher J. Fiorese, Ph.D. Abraham Flamholz, Ph.D.Jorge Arturo Gamez de Leon, Ph.D. Shashank Gandhi, Ph.D.Hannah Greenfeld, Ph.D. Bo Gu Ph.D.Livia Hecke Morais, Ph.D.Richard Felix Horns, Ph.D. 1Yongxi Hu, Ph.D. Alison Inglis, Ph.DJihyun Irizarry, Ph.D. Uriah Israel, Ph.D.Joanna Jachowicz, Ph.D.Min Jee Jang, Ph.D.Seongmin Jang, Ph.D.Yamini Jangir, Ph.D. Maulik Jani, Ph.D.Yan Jin, Ph.D. Anat Kahan, Ph.D.Jessleen Kanwal, Ph.D.Mohammed Kaplan, Ph.D.Tomomi Karigo, Ph.D. Tahmineh Khazaei, Ph.D. Sheila Kitchen, Ph.D.Heidi Klumpe, Ph.D.Erin Koch, Ph.D.Levente Kovacs, Ph.D.Anton Kuzmenko, Ph.D.Dongyang Li, Ph.D.Shan Li, Ph.D.Zachery Lonergan Ph.D.Ke Lyu, Ph.D. Duo Ma, Ph.D.Stefano Maggi, Ph.D.Vishal Maingi, Ph.D. Sierra Marable, Ph.D.Darcy McRose, Ph.D. Erick Moen, Ph.D.Krithika Mohan, Ph.D.George Mountoufaris, Ph.D.1Ranjani Murali, Ph.D.Agota Nagy, Ph.D. Susan Newcomb, Ph.D.Aaron L. Nichols, Ph.D. William Nicolas, Ph.D.Sumner Norman, Ph.D.Aki Ohdera, Ph.D.Youcef Ouadah, Ph.D. Pallavi Panda, Ph.D.Elena Perry, Ph.D. Alon Philosof, Ph.D.Tino Pleiner, Ph.D. Michal Polonsky, Ph.D. Rachel Rosenzweig Ph.D.Yuan Ruan, Ph.D. 1 Sofia Sakellardi, Ph.D. Lindsey Salay, Ph.D. 1Estefania Sanchez Vasquez, Ph.D. Scott Saunders Ph.D.Dominic Scalise, Ph.D.Dominik Schildknecht, Ph.D.Aubrey Schonhoff, Ph.D. Henry L. Schreiber IV, Ph.D. Shahriar Shadkhoo Ph.D.Boyoung Shin, Ph.D.Tom Sidwell, Ph.D. Kyobi Skutt-Kakaria, Ph.D.Tatiana Solovieva, Ph.D. Tianqi Song, Ph.D.Georgia Squyres, Ph.D. Argyrios Stefanos Stagkourakis, Ph.D.752Trustees, Administration, Faculty 1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute 753Historical SketchJan Stundl Ph.D.Jingjing Sun, Ph.D.Russell Swift, Ph.D.Sarolta Szentes, Ph.D. Yodai Takei, Ph.D. Chieh-Hsiang Tan Ph.D. Qing Tang, Ph.D. Halil Tekin, Ph.D. Carsten Tischbirek, Ph.D. Huy Ngoc Steven Tran, Ph.D. Melissa Truong, Ph.D. Zeynep Turan, Ph.D. Chelsey VanDrisse, Ph.D. Amit Vinograd, Ph.D. Xuan Wan, Ph.D. Bo Wang, Ph.D. Jamie Wangen, Ph.D. Brandon Weissbourd, Ph.D. Joseph Wekselblatt, Ph.D. Jin Xu, Ph.D.Shuwa Xu, Ph.D.Takako Yamamoto, D.D.S, Ph.D. Fan Yang, Ph.D. Zhe Yang, Ph.D. An Zhang, Ph.D.Gang Zhang, Ph.D.Mengying Zhang, Ph.D.Rong Wei Zhang, Ph.D. Wei Zhao, Ph.D. Yuan Zhao, Ph.D. Yang Zheng, Ph.D.  Visitors David Basta, Ph.D.Elaine L. Bearer, Ph.D., M.D Libera Berghella, Ph.D.Paul Chang, M.S.David Garcia, Ph.D. Stefan Kreida, Ph.D. Anthony Linares, Ph.D., M.D. Masahiko Noguchi, B.S.Barry Olafson, Ph.D.Philip Petersen, Ph.D.Noelle Stiles, Ph.D.753Biology and Biological Engineering754Trustees, Administration, Faculty DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY  AND CHEMICAL ENGINEERINGDennis Dougherty Norman Davidson Leadership ChairZhen-Gang Wang    Chemical EngineeringTheodor Agapie Shu-ou Shan Molecular Biophysics  Professors Emeriti Fred C. Anson, Ph.D., D.h.c.  Elizabeth W. Gilloon Professor of  ChemistryJohn D. Baldeschwieler, Ph.D.  J. Stanley Johnson Professor and  Professor of Chemistry John E. Bercaw, Ph.D.  Centennial Professor of Chemistry Sunney I. Chan, Ph.D. George Grant Hoag Professor of  Biophysical ChemistryPeter B. Dervan, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Bren Professor of Chemistry George R. Gavalas, Ph.D. Chemical EngineeringProfessors Theodor Agapie, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry; Executive  Frances H. Arnold, Ph.D., Nobel  Laureate  Linus Pauling Professor of Chemical  Engineering, Bioengineering, and Biochemistry, Director of the Donna  and Benjamin M. Rosen Bioengineer-ing CenterJacqueline K. Barton, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.L.h.c.  John G. Kirkwood and Arthur A. Noyes Professor of Chemistry Jesse L. Beauchamp, Ph.D. Mary and Charles Ferkel Professor of  Chemistry  Professor of Cosmochemistry and  Planetary Sciences and Professor of  ChemistryJohn F. Brady, Ph.D.  Chevron Professor of Chemical  Engineering and Mechanical EngineeringJudith L. Campbell, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry and Biology Garnet K. Chan, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Chemistry William C. Clemons, Ph.D. Arthur and Marian Hanisch Memorial Professor of Biochemistry Mark E. Davis, Ph.D. Warren and Katharine Schlinger  Professor of Chemical Engineering Dennis A. Dougherty, Ph.D.  George Grant Hoag Professor of  Chemistry; Norman Davidson Leadership; Chair, Division of  Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringRichard C. Flagan, Ph.D.  Irma and Ross McCollum-William H. Corcoran Professor of Chemical  Engineering and Environmental  Science and EngineeringGregory C. Fu, Ph.D.  Norman Chandler Professor of Chemis -try Konstantinos P. Giapis, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemical Engineering William A. Goddard III, Ph.D.  Charles and Mary Ferkel Professor  of Chemistry, Materials Science, and  Applied PhysicsHarry B. Gray, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., Lau -rea h.c., Fil.Dr.h.c., D.L.h.c.  Arnold O. Beckman Professor of  Chemistry and Founding Director of  the Beckman InstituteRobert H. Grubbs, Ph.D., Nobel Laureate  Victor and Elizabeth Atkins  Professor of Chemistry Andre Hoelz, Ph.D. 1 Professor of Chemistry and Biochem -istry; Faculty Scholar, Howard Hughes  Medical Institute 1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute 755Historical SketchLinda C. Hsieh-Wilson, Ph.D. Milton and Rosalind Chang Professor  of Chemistry Rustem F. Ismagilov, Ph.D.  Ethel Wilson Bowles and Robert Bowles Professor of Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering; Merkin Institute Professor; Director of the Jacobs  Institute for Molecular Engineering for Medicine  Elizabeth W. Gilloon Professor of  Chemical EngineeringNathan S. Lewis, Ph.D. George L. Argyros Professor and Pro -fessor of ChemistryKarthish Manthiram, Ph.D. Professor of Chemical Engineering and  ChemistryRudolph A. Marcus, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.,  Fil.Dr.h.c., D.h.c., Nobel Laureate  John G. Kirkwood and Arthur A. Noyes Professor of Chemistry Stephen L. Mayo, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Biology and  Chemistry; Merkin Institute Professor Thomas F. Miller III, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemistry Hosea M. Nelson, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry  Mitchio Okumura, Ph.D. Professor of Chemical Physics Carl S. Parker, Ph.D.  Professor of Biochemistry Jonas C. Peters, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Chemistry,  Director of the Resnick  Sustainability InstituteDouglas C. Rees, Ph.D.1 Roscoe Gilkey Dickinson Professor of  ChemistrySarah E. Reisman, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Chemistry John H. Seinfeld, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Louis E. Nohl Professor and  Professor of Chemical Engineering Shu-ou Shan, Ph.D. Altair Professor of Chemistry; Executive  BiophysicsMikhail G. Shapiro, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemical Engineering Brian M. Stoltz, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute  David A. Tirrell, Ph.D., D.h.c.  Provost; Ross McCollumŒWilliam H.  Corcoran Professor of Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering Carl and Shirley Larson Provostial Chair  Zhen-Gang Wang, Ph.D.  Dick and Barbara Dickinson Professor  of Chemical Engineering; Executive Daniel P. Weitekamp, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemical Physics Assistant Professors Shasha Chong, Ph.D. Chemistry Scott K. Cushing, Ph.D. ChemistryRyan G. Hadt, Ph.D. ChemistryMaxwell J. Robb, Ph.D. ChemistryKimberly A. See, Ph.D. ChemistryDaniel R. Semlow, Ph.D.  Biochemistry Lu Wei, Ph.D  ChemistryResearch Assistant Professor Alison E. Ondrus, Ph.D. Lecturers Kathryn Bikle, M.A. ChemistryNathan Dalleska, Ph.D. ChemistryChristian Goodnow, M.S.  Chemistry  ChemistryMichael Takase, Ph.D.  Chemistry755Chemistry and Chemical Engineering756Trustees, Administration, Faculty Scott Virgil, Ph.D.  ChemistryMichael Vicic, Ph.D.  Chemical EngineeringJay R. Winkler, Ph.D.  ChemistryFaculty AssociatesJay A. Labinger, Ph.D.  ChemistryVisiting Associates  Qi An, Ph.D. Materials EngineeringCalum Chisholm, Ph.D. Materials ScienceWon-chae Choe, Ph.D.  BiochemistrySiddharth Dasgupta, Ph.D. ChemistryStephen Forman, M.D. MedicineAlessandro Fortunelli, Ph.D.  ChemistryZeev Gross, Ph.D.  ChemistryMichael Hill, Ph.D. ChemistryJames B. Howard, Ph.D.  BiochemistryDarrin Lee, Ph.D. Neuroscience Sergey Morozov, Ph.D.  Physical and Mathematical ScienceRobert Tanner, Ph.D.  Chemical EngineeringJohn Williams, Ph.D. ChemistryShaocai Yu, Ph.D.  Atmospheric ScienceMembers of the Beckman InstituteBruce S. Brunschwig, Ph.D.Jay R. Winkler, Ph.D. Members of the Professional Staff Suresha Guptha, M.S.  Chemical EngineeringLawrence R. Henling, M.S.  ChemistrySonjong Hwang, Ph.D. ChemistryJay Labinger, Ph.D.  ChemistryBoris Merinov, Ph.D.  ChemistryMona Shahgholi, Ph.D. ChemistryDavid Vander Velde, Ph.D  ChemistrySenior Postdoctoral ScholarChristopher Bley, PhD. George William Mobbs, Ph.D. Postdoctoral ScholarsEdwin Alfonzo, Ph.D. Soumitra Athavale, Ph.D.Yasemin Basdogan, Ph.D. Daniel Bim, Ph.D.Trixia Buscagan, Ph.D. Azhar Carim, Ph.D. David Charboneau, Ph.D.Caiyou Chen, Ph.D.Shensheng Chen, Ph.D. Tzu-Ling Chen, Ph.D.Yu-Shiuan Cheng, Ph.D. Simon Cooper, Ph.D. Gozde Demirer, Ph.D.  Joseph DeRosa, Ph.D.Jorge Emiliano Deustua Stahr, Ph.D. Hai Dong, Ph.D.Austin Dulaney, Ph.D.  Semar Ejder, Ph.D. Conner Farley, Ph.D. Alec Follmer, Ph.D. Fu, Donglong, Ph.D.Pablo Garrido Barros, Ph.D. Arpit Gupta, Ph.D.Reza Haghshenas, Ph.D.David Hill, Ph.D.Bo Shun Huang, Ph.D.Veronica Hubble, Ph.D.  Si Hyung Jin, Ph.D.Hailey Knox, Ph.D.Soonho Kwon, Ph.D.Henrik Larsson, Ph.D.Forrest Laskowski, Ph.D. Seunghoon Lee, Ph.D.Alfred Lentzsch, Ph.D. 757Historical Sketch757Shaoyang Lin, Ph.D.Hanzhe Liu, Ph.D.Zhen Liu, Ph.D.Trevor Lohrey, Ph. D. Amirhossein Mafi, Ph.D.Sriteja Mantha, Ph.D.Charles Markus, Ph.D.Brendon McNicholas, Ph.D. David Miller, Ph.D. George Mobbs, Ph.D.Si Nie, Ph.D. Weixuan Nie, Ph.D. Richa Nigam, Ph.D.Samantaray, Paresh, Ph.D.  Nicholas Porter, Ph.D. Christopher Poteat, Ph.D. Buddhi Pushpawela, Ph.D.Chenxi Qian, Ph.D.Claire Rabut, Ph.D. Melissa Ramirez, Ph.D. Alexander Rand, Ph.D.Raheleh Ravanfar, Ph.D. Md Kausar Raza, Ph.D.Stephen Sardini, Ph.D. Alexander Rigel Siegel, Ph.D.Doris Taylor, Ph.D. Ruslan Tazhigulov, Ph.D. Stephanie Threatt, Ph.D. Lei Wang, Ph.D. Mingyi Wang, Ph.D.  Rebeccah Warmack, Ph.D. Moon Young Yang, Ph.D. Yuxing Yao, Ph.D. Sangjin Yoo, Ph.D. Huanchen Zhai, Ph.D.Feng Zhong, Ph.D.Tianyu Zhu, Ph.D.  Visitors Avinoam Bar Zion, Ph.D.  Bioengineering Wei-Chen Chen, Ph.D.  ChemistryBryan Hunter, Ph.D.  ChemistryRicardo Matute, Ph.D.  ChemistryJohn Thompson, Ph.D. Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Keiko Yokoyama, Ph.D.  BiochemistryTed Yu, Ph.D.  Materials Science757Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringDIVISION OF ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCEHarry A. Atwater Otis Booth Leadership ChairBeverley J. McKeon  EAS Division Deputy Chair José E. Andrade  Cecil and Sally Drinkward Leadership  and Civil Engineering Azita Emami  -neering Morteza Gharib  Booth-Kresa Leadership Chair, Center  for Autonomous Systems and Technol -ogies; Director, Graduate Aerospace  Laboratories Yu-Chong Tai   Andrew and Peggy Cherng Medical  Engineering Leadership Chair; Execu-Kerry J. Vahala  and Materials Science Paul O. Wennberg    Science and Engineering Christopher M. Umans Mathematical SciencesProfessors Emeriti James L. Beck, Ph.D.  George W. Housner Professor of Engi -neering and Applied Science Christopher E. Brennen, D.Phil.   Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineering  William B. Bridges, Ph.D.  Carl F Braun Professor of Engineering Norman H. Brooks, Ph.D.   James Irvine Professor of Environmen -tal and Civil Engineering K. Mani Chandy, Ph.D.   Simon Ramo Professor of Computer  Science Noel R. Corngold, Ph.D.   Applied PhysicsFred E. Culick, Ph.D.   Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineering  and Professor of Jet Propulsion James P. Eisenstein, Ph.D.   Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics  and Applied Physics Charles Elachi, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.  Electrical Engineering and Planetary Science Thomas E. Everhart, Ph.D., D.L.h.c., D.h.c.  Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics David L. Goodstein, Ph.D.  Frank J. Gilloon Distinguished Teaching  and Service Professor and Professor of  Physics and Applied Physics Roy W. Gould, Ph.D.   Simon Ramo Professor of Engineering John F. Hall, Ph.D.   Civil Engineering  Thomas H. Heaton, Ph.D.  Engineering SeismologyHans G. Hornung, Ph.D., D.h.c.   C. L. ﬁKellyﬂ Johnson Professor of  Aeronautics   Paul C. Jennings, Ph.D.  Civil Engineering and Applied Me-chanics William L. Johnson, Ph.D.  Ruben F. and Donna Mettler Professor  of Engineering and Applied ScienceWolfgang G. Knauss, Ph.D.   Theodore von Kármán Professor of  Aeronautics and Applied Mechanics Anthony Leonard, Ph.D.   Theodore von Kármán Professor of  Aeronautics E. John List, Ph.D.  Environmental Engineering Science Alain J. Martin, Ing.  Computer ScienceCarver Mead, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.h.c.  Gordon and Betty Moore Professor of  Engineering and Applied Science Marc A. Nicolet, Ph.D.   Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics758Trustees, Administration, Faculty Michael Ortiz, Ph.D.  Frank and Ora Lee Marble Profes -sor of Aeronautics and Mechanical  Engineering David B. Rutledge, Ph.D.  Kiyo and Eiko Tomiyasu Professor of  Engineering Theodore Y. Wu, Ph.D.   Engineering ScienceProfessors Yaser S. Abu-Mostafa, Ph.D.   Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Jess F. Adkins, Ph.D.   Smits Family Professor of Geochemis -try and Global Environmental Science  Aaron D. Ames, Ph.D.   Bren Professor of Mechanical and Civil  Engineering and Control and Dynami -cal Systems Animashree Anandkumar, Ph.D.   Bren Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences José E. Andrade, Ph.D.  George W. Housner Professor of Civil  and Mechanical Engineering Domniki Asimaki, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil Engineering Harry A. Atwater, Ph.D.   Otis Booth Leadership Chair, Division  of Engineering and Applied Science; Howard Hughes Professor of Applied  Physics and Materials Science; Direc -tor, Liquid Sunlight Alliance Joanna M. Austin, Ph.D.  Aerospace  Jean-Philippe Avouac, Ph.D.   Earle C. Anthony Professor of Geology  and Mechanical and Civil EngineeringAlan H. Barr, Ph.D.   Computer SciencePaul M. Bellan, Ph.D.  Applied PhysicsMarco Bernardi, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceKaushik Bhattacharya, Ph.D.  Howell N. Tyson, Sr., Professor of  Mechanics and Materials Science; Vice  Provost Guillaume Blanquart, Ph.D.  Mechanical EngineeringSimona Bordoni, Ph.D.   Environmental Science and Engineer -ing John F. Brady, Ph.D.   Chevron Professor of Chemical Engi -neering and Mechanical EngineeringRobert D. Braun, Ph.D. Aerospace; Director of the JPL Plane -tary Science Directorate Jehoshua Bruck, Ph.D.  Gordon and Betty Moore Professor of  Computation and Neural Systems and Electrical EngineeringOscar P. Bruno, Ph.D.   Applied and Computational Mathe-maticsJoel W. Burdick, Ph.D.   Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineering  and Bioengineering; JPL Research  ScientistVenkat Chandrasekaran, Ph.D.   Computing and Mathematical Sciences and Electrical EngineeringSoon-Jo Chung, Sc.D.  Bren Professor of Aerospace and  Control and Dynamical Systems; JPL  Research Scientist Timothy E. Colonius, Ph.D.  Frank and Ora Lee Marble Professor of  Mechanical EngineeringJohn O. Dabiri, Ph.D.  Centennial Professor of Aeronautics  and Mechanical EngineeringChiara Daraio, Ph.D.  G. Bradford Jones Professor of  Mechanical Engineering and Applied Physics; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute Mathieu Desbrun, Ph.D.  Carl F Braun Professor of Computing  and Mathematical SciencesMichael H. Dickinson, Ph.D.  Esther M. and Abe M. Zarem Professor  of Bioengineering and Aeronautics,   Biological EngineeringPaul E. Dimotakis, Ph.D.  John K. Northrop Professor of  Aeronautics and Professor of Applied  Physics759759Engineering and Applied Science760Trustees, Administration, Faculty John C. Doyle, Ph.D.  Jean-Lou Chameau Professor of Con -trol and Dynamical Systems, Electrical  Engineering, and Bioengineering  George Van Osdol Professor of Electri -cal Engineering; Vice Provost Azita Emami, Ph.D. Andrew and Peggy Cherng Professor  of Electrical Engineering and Medical Engineering; Director, Center for Sens -ing to IntelligenceKatherine T. Faber, Ph.D.  Simon Ramo Professor of Materials  ScienceAndrei Faraon, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Electrical Engi-neeringRichard C. Flagan, Ph.D.  Irma and Ross McCollumŒWilliam H. Corcoran Professor of Chemical En -gineering and Environmental Science  and EngineeringBrent T. Fultz, Ph.D.   Barbara and Stanley R. Rawn, Jr.,  Professor of Materials Science and  Applied PhysicsMorteza Gharib, Ph.D. Hans W. Liepmann Professor of Aero -nautics and Bioinspired Engineering;  Director, Center for Autonomous  Systems and Technologies William A. Goddard, Ph.D.   Charles and Mary Ferkel Professor  of Chemistry, Materials Science, and  Applied PhysicsJulia R. Greer, Ph.D.   Ruben F. and Donna Mettler Professor  of Materials Science, Mechanics and Medical Engineering; Fletcher Jones Foundation; Director of the Kavli Nano -science InstituteAli Hajimiri, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Electrical Engineer -ing and Medical Engineering; Co-Direc -tor, Space-Based Solar Power Project Babak Hassibi, Ph.D. Mose and Lillian S. Bohn Professor of  Electrical Engineering and Computing and Mathematical Sciences John S. and Sherry Chen Professor of  Environmental Science Yizhao Thomas Hou, Ph.D.   Charles Lee Powell Professor of Ap -plied and Computational MathematicsMelany L. Hunt, Ph.D.  Dotty and Dick Hayman Professor of  Mechanical EngineeringVictoria Kostina, Ph.D.   Electrical Engineering and Computing and Mathematical SciencesNadia Lapusta, Ph.D.  Lawrence A. Hanson, Jr., Professor  of Mechanical Engineering and Geo-physicsJared R. Leadbetter, Ph.D.   Environmental Microbiology Steven H. Low, Ph.D.   Frank J. Gilloon Professor of Comput -ing and Mathematical Sciences and Electrical EngineeringMatilde Marcolli, Ph.D.  Robert F. Christy Professor of Mathe -matics and Computing and Mathemat-ical SciencesBeverley J. McKeon, Ph.D.  Theodore von Kármán Professor of  Aeronautics Daniel I. Meiron, Sc.D.   Fletcher Jones Professor of Aeronau -tics and Applied andComputational MathematicsAustin J. Minnich, Ph.D.  Mechanical Engineering and Applied PhysicsRichard M. Murray, Ph.D.   Thomas E. and Doris Everhart Profes -sor of Control and Dynamical Systems  and Bioengineering; William K. Bowes Jr. Leadership Chair, Division of Biology  and Biological EngineeringHouman Owhadi, Ph.D.  Applied and Computational Mathe-matics and Control and Dynamical  SystemsLior S. Pachter, Ph.D.   Bren Professor of Computational Biol -ogy and Computing and Mathematical Sciences Oskar J. Painter, Ph.D.   John G Braun Professor of Applied  Physics and PhysicsSergio Pellegrino, Ph.D.  Joyce and Kent Kresa Professor of  Aerospace and Civil Engineering; JPL  Senior Research Scientist; Co-Director,  Space-Based Solar Power Project Pietro Perona, D.Eng., Ph.D.  Allen E. Puckett Professor of Electrical  EngineeringRobert B. Phillips, Ph.D.  Fred and Nancy Morris Professor of  Biophysics, Biology and PhysicsNiles A. Pierce, D.Phil.   Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics and Bioengineering Dale I. Pullin, Ph.D. Robert H. Goddard Professor of  Aeronautics Guruswami Ravichandran, Ph.D., D.h.c.  John E. Goode, Jr., Professor of Aero -space and Mechanical EngineeringAres J. Rosakis, Ph.D.   Theodore von Kármán Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engi -neeringMichael L. Roukes, Ph.D.  Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics,  Applied Physics, and BioengineeringAxel Scherer, Ph.D.   Bernard Neches Professor of Electrical  Engineering, Applied Physics and Physics; Merkin Institute Professor Tapio Schneider, Ph.D.   Theodore Y. Wu Professor of Environ -mental Science and Engineering, JPL Senior Research Scientist Peter Schröder, Ph.D.   Shaler Arthur Hanisch Professor of  Computer Science and Applied and Computational MathematicsLeonard J. Schulman, Ph.D.   Computer ScienceKeith C. Schwab, Ph.D.  Applied PhysicsJohn H. Seinfeld, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.  Louis E. Nohl Professor of Chemical  EngineeringJoseph E. Shepherd, Ph.D.   C. L. ﬁKellyﬂ Johnson Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engi -neeringAthanassios G. Siapas, Ph.D.  Computation and Neural Systems; Neural SystemsAndrew M. Stuart, Ph.D.   Bren Professor of Computing and  Mathematical SciencesYu-Chong Tai, Ph.D.   Anna L. Rosen Professor of Electrical  Engineering and Medical EngineeringSandra M. Troian, Ph.D.   Applied Physics, Aeronautics, and  Mechanical EngineeringJoel A. Tropp, Ph.D.   Steele Family Professor of Applied and  Computational MathematicsChristopher M. Umans, Ph.D.  Computer ScienceKerry J. Vahala, Ph.D.   Ted and Ginger Jenkins Professor of  Information Science and Technology  and Applied PhysicsP. P. Vaidyanathan, Ph.D.   Kiyo and Eiko Tomiyasu Professor of  Electrical EngineeringThomas G. Vidick, Ph.D.   Computing and Mathematical SciencesLihong Wang, Ph.D.   Bren Professor of Medical Engineering  and Electrical EngineeringMichael M. Watkins, Ph.D.    Aerospace and Geophysics Paul O. Wennberg, Ph.D.   R. Stanton Avery Professor of Atmo -spheric Chemistry and Environmental  Science and Engineering; Director,  Ronald and Maxine Linde Center for Global Environmental Science Adam C. Wierman, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical Scienc-es; Director, Information Science and  Technology  Erik Winfree, Ph.D.   Computer Science, Computation and Neural Systems, and BioengineeringChanghuei Yang, Ph.D.   Thomas G. Myers Professor of  Electrical Engineering, Bioengineering and Medical Engineering; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute 761Historical Sketch761Engineering and Applied Science1 Joint appointment with Howard Hughes Medical Institute Amnon Yariv, Ph.D.    -sor of Applied Physics and Electrical EngineeringYisong Yue, Ph.D.   Computing and Mathematical SciencesAssistant Professors Katherine L. Bouman, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical Sciences and Electrical Engineering; Rosenberg  Scholar; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute Joseph L. Falson, Ph.D. Materials ScienceXiaojing (Ruby) Fu, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringWei Gao, Ph.D.   Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute  Urmila Mahadev, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesAlireza Marandi, Ph.D.   Electrical Engineering and Applied PhysicsEric Mazumdar, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical Sciences and EconomicsMohammad Mirhosseini, Ph.D. Electrical Engineering and Applied PhysicsStevan Nadj-Perge, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceTeaching Professors Glen A. George, M.S.  Electrical Engineering Michael Mello, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil Engineering Michael C. Vanier, Ph.D.   Computing and Mathematical Sciences  Teaching Assistant Professors Adam Blank, M.S.  Computing and Mathematical Sci-encesMelissa Hovik, M.S. Computing and Mathematical Sciences Konstantin M. Zuev, Ph.D.   Computing and Mathematical SciencesInstructors Oscar Leong, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesDonald Pinkston III, B.S.  Schmidt Software Academy Instructor Elizabeth Y. Qian, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesLecturers Channing Ahn, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceErin R. Burkett, Ph.D. -cationStefano Campagnola, Ph.D. Aerospace Anthony T. Fragoso, Ph.D.*  Aerospace   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceDouglas C. Hofmann, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceCassandra V. Horii, Ph.D.   EngineeringRobyn M. Javier, Ph.D.   -cationAndrew T. Klesh, Ph.D.   Aerospace Victoria F. Meyer, Ph.D.   -cation Gunter Niemeyer, Ph.D.   Mechanical and Civil EngineeringShouleh Nikzad, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringRichard Ohanian, M.S.  Electrical EngineeringDanny Petrasek, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringJames E. Polk, Ph.D.  Aerospace 762Trustees, Administration, Faculty  763Historical SketchClaire C. Ralph, M.S.   Computing and Mathematical SciencesDamon S. Russell, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringPaul B. Stovall Mechanical and Civil EngineeringJennifer Weaver, Ph.D.   EngineeringNathan M. Wilson, Ph.D. -cation *In residence 2021-22 Research Professors John M. Gregoire, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceMonica D. Kohler, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil EngineeringHillary Mushkin, M.F.A.  Art and Design and Humanities and Social SciencesPaul W. K. Rothemund, Ph.D.  Bioengineering, Computing & Math-ematical Sciences, and Computation and Neural SystemsChengxiang Xiang, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceMoore Distinguished Scholars Steven L. Brunton, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringMatthew M. Cook, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesVisiting Associates Daniel Arthur, Ph.D.   Mechanical and Civil EngineeringJosette Bellan, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil Engineering Harsha S. Bhat, Ph.D. Aerospace Henry Blauvelt, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials Science Amy Braverman, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesAlaina Brinley, M.D., Ph.D.   Electrical EngineeringGentian Buzi, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesRobert D. (Dale) Conner, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceAbhishek Day, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesEmmanuel Gdoutos, Ph.D.  Aerospace Ashwin Gopinath, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesJonathan Grandidier, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceDouglas C. Hofmann, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceJack Lee Jewell, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceKaranjit Kalsi, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesFarbod Khoshnoud, Ph.D. Aerospace Robert J. Lang, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringScott Mark Lewis, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceAlexis C. Livanos, Ph.D.  Aerospace  Douglas G. MacMartin, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesSami F. Masri, Ph.D.   Mechanical and Civil EngineeringAnthony Massari, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil Engineering Peter A. Petillo, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceDanny Petrasek, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering Aditya Rajagopal, Ph.D.  Electrical EngineeringAlireza Ramezani, Ph.D.  Aerospace  Alton D. Romig, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceDamon S. Russell, Ph.D. Electrical Engineering763Engineering and Applied Science764Trustees, Administration, Faculty Jonathan Russin, M.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering Konrad H. Samwer, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceJonathan Sauder, Ph.D.  Aerospace Peter C. Sercel, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials ScienceConstantine Sideris, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesBenjamin T. Vest, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials SciencePeter W. Voorhees, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials SciencePin Chieh Wu, Ph.D.   Applied Physics and Materials Science Kakani K. Young, Ph.D.  Aerospace  Gabriel Zada, M.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering Members of the Professional Staff Xenia Amashukeli, Ph.D. Resnick Sustainability InstituteNathan F. Dalleska, Ph.D.  Global Environmental Center Guy A. DeRose, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials Science  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceJoel A. Haber, Ph.D.  -thesisChristos T. Santis, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceSenior Postdoctoral ScholarsBamdad Hosseini, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesPostdoctoral ScholarsAisulu Aitbekova, Ph.D. KNI Postdoctoral Scholar in Applied Physics and Materials ScienceSaleh Aliyari, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringAnagha Madhusudanan, Ph.D. Aerospace Matthew James Anderson, Ph.D. Aerospace Atul Singh Arora, Ph.D.   Computing & Mathematical SciencesRui Cao, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringShunxiang Cao, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringUlysse Chabaud, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesKelvin Titimbo Chaparro, Ph.D.  Medical EngineeringMo Chen, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceYongsuk Choi, Ph.D.  Medical EngineeringErnesto Hidalgo Criado, Ph.D.  James Boswell Postdoctoral Scholar in Aerospace Samuel Pascal Xia Davis, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engineering Elham Davoodi, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical  EngineeringMichelle Feng, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesMatthew Kuenzli Fu, Ph.D. Aerospace Shiyuan Gao, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceAnindya Ghoshroy, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringRoni Goldshmid, Ph.D. Aerospace Meir Yoel Grajower  Applied Physics and Materials Science765Historical Sketch Lei Guo, Ph.D. Environmental Science and Engineer -ingQiushi Guo, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringClaudio Hail, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceHamed Bajgiran Hamze  Computing and Mathematical SciencesArmanj Hasanyan, Ph.D. Aerospace Zhe He, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringMichael Howland, Ph.D. Aerospace Saman Jahani, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringByoung-Jin Jeon, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesPankaj Kumar Jha, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceHuaizu Jiang, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical SciencesChaitali Joshi, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringMatias Efstathios Kagias, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceEmil Karshalev, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringIsrael Kellersztein, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringAroutin Khachaturian, Ph.D.   Electrical EngineeringAnjul Khadria, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringSiavash Monfared Sokhan Khosh,  Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringJeongrae Kim, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Material ScienceRafal Kocielnik, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesDanilo Maldonado Kusanovic, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringDavid Lake, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceJoel Lawson, Ph.D. Aerospace Aviad Levis, Ph.D.  Computing & Mathematical SciencesJing Li, Ph.D. Environmental Science and Engineer -ingLei Li, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringXueqian (Lucy) Li, Ph.D. KNI Postdoctoral Scholar in Applied Physics and Materials ScienceZhenzhen Li, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesLi Lin, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringJingcheng Liu, Ph.D. Wally Baer and Jeri Weiss Postdoctoral  Scholar in Computing and Mathemati-cal SciencesKe Liu, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil Engineering Wen Luo, Ph.D.  Aerospace Ameneh Maghsoodi, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringIvan Maliyov, Ph.D.   KNI Postdoctoral Scholar in Applied Physics and Materials ScienceMichaelle Mayalu, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesSean McBeath, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and Engineer -ingSrujan Meesala, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceLior Michaeli, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceTamas Molnar, Ph.D.   Mechanical and Civil EngineeringAdrian Rosende Moure, Ph.D.   Mechanical and Civil EngineeringShuai Na, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering765Engineering and Applied ScienceYashwanth Kumar Nakka, Ph.D.  Aerospace Rajveer Nehra, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringTrung Kien Nguyen, Ph.D.  Computing & Mathematical SciencesElif Oral, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringElizabeth O™Reilly, Ph.D.  Computing & Mathematical SciencesMidya Parto, Ph.D. Electrical EngineeringDaniel Moreno Pastor, Ph.D.  Mechanical and Civil EngineeringLuis Pereira da Costa, Ph.D.  Electrical EngineeringWilliam Poole, Ph.D. Computing and Mathematical SciencesAnshuman Pradhan, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesSeth Pree, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceYunliang Qi, Ph.D.  Aerospace Guannan Qu, Ph.D. Resnick Sustainability Institute Post-doctoral Scholar in Computing and Mathematical SciencesSudheesh Kumar Rajput, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringSuraj Muthiramalil Ravindran, Ph.D. Aerospace Xinying Ren, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesUgo Rosolia, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringTyler Ross, Ph.D.   Computing & Mathematical SciencesOren Sabag, Ph.D.  Electrical EngineeringBehnam Sadri, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringHossein Pirsoltan Salahshoor, Ph.D.  Aerospace Lennart Schneiders, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringJuliane Moreto Sempionatto, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringSoudabeh Mashhadi Sheikholharam, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceBoqiang Shen, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceEhsan Shirzaei Sani, Ph.D. Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringYu Song, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringJaimie Marie Stewart, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesHe Sun, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesXingsheng Sun, Ph.D. Aerospace Shih Hao Tseng, Ph.D.  Computing & Mathematical SciencesHeming Wang, Ph.D.  Applied Physics and Materials ScienceMinqiang Wang, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringPeng Wang, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringTing-Wei Wang, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringRobert Webber, Ph.D.  Computing & Mathematical SciencesXunyi Wu, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and Engineer -ingXiaobin Xiong, Ph.D. Mechanical and Civil EngineeringPan Xu, Ph.D. Computing & Mathematical SciencesCui Ye, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringYou Yu, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringYang Zhang, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neering766Trustees, Administration, Faculty 767Yide Zhang, Ph.D.  Cherng Department of Medical Engi -neeringDing Zhong, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceHaoxin Zhou, Ph.D. Applied Physics and Materials ScienceTingtao Zhou, Ph.D. Cecil and Sally Drinkward Postdoc -toral Scholar in Mechanical and Civil Engineering767Engineering and Applied ScienceDIVISION OF GEOLOGICAL  AND PLANETARY  SCIENCESJohn P. Grotzinger  Ted and Ginger Jenkins  Leadership ChairAndrew F. Thompson  Michael C. Gurnis  Director, Seismological Laboratory Paul O. Wennberg, Director  Linde Center for Global Environmental  ScienceProfessors Emeriti  Arden L. Albee, Ph.D.  Geology and Planetary ScienceDonald S. Burnett, Ph.D.  Nuclear GeochemistryCharles Elachi, Ph.D. Electrical Engineering and Planetary SciencePeter Goldreich, Ph.D.  Lee A. DuBridge Professor of  Astrophysics and Planetary Physics Thomas H. Heaton, Ph.D. Professor of Engineering Seismology Hiroo Kanamori, Ph.D.  John E. and Hazel S. Smits Professor  of GeophysicsDuane O. Muhleman, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceJason B. Saleeby, Ph.D.  GeologyLeon T. Silver, Ph.D.  W. M. Keck Foundation Professor for  Resource Geology David J. Stevenson, Ph.D.Marvin L. Goldberger Professor of Planetary ScienceHugh P. Taylor Jr., Ph.D.  Robert P. Sharp Professor of Geology Peter J. Wyllie, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Geology Professors Jess F. Adkins, Ph.D.  Smits Family Professor of  Geochemistry and Global Environmental Science Paul D. Asimow, Ph.D.  Eleanor and John R. McMillan Professor of Geology and  GeochemistryJean-Philippe Avouac, Doctorat  Earle C. Anthony Professor of Geology  and Mechanical and Civil EngineeringKonstantin Batygin, Ph.D. Planetary Science  Cosmochemistry and Planetary Science and ChemistrySimona Bordoni, Ph.D.   Environmental Science and  EngineeringMichael E. Brown, Ph.D.  Richard and Barbara Rosenberg  Professor of Planetary Astronomy;  Terence D. Barr Leadership Chair and  Director of Caltech Center for  Comparative Planetary EvolutionRobert W. Clayton, Ph.D.  GeophysicsBethany L. Ehlmann, Ph.D. Planetary Science; Associate Director,  Keck Institute for Space StudiesJohn M. Eiler, Ph.D.  Robert P. Sharp Professor of Geology  and GeochemistryKenneth A. Farley, Ph.D.  W. M. Keck Foundation Professor of  GeochemistryWoodward W. Fischer, Ph.D.  Professor of Geobiology; Associate  Director, Center for Autonomous Sys -tems and Technologies Christian Frankenberg, Ph.D. Environmental Science and Engi -neering; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Research Scientist John P. Grotzinger, Ph.D.  Harold Brown Professor of Geology Michael C. Gurnis, Ph.D.  John E. and Hazel S. Smits Professor  of Geophysics768Trustees, Administration, Faculty 769Historical Sketch$Andrew P. Ingersoll, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceJennifer M. Jackson, Ph.D. William E. Leonhard Professor of  Mineral PhysicsJoseph L. Kirschvink, Ph.D. Nico and Marilyn Van Wingen Professor  of GeobiologyHeather A. Knutson, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceShrinivas R. Kulkarni, Ph.D.  George Ellery Hale Professor of  Astronomy and Planetary Science;  Director, Caltech Optical Observatories Michael P. Lamb, Ph.D.  GeologyNadia Lapusta, Ph.D. Lawrence A. Hanson, Jr. Professor of  Mechanical Engineering and GeophysicsJared R. Leadbetter, Ph.D.  Environmental Microbiology Dianne K. Newman, Ph.D. Gordon M. Binder/Amgen Professor  of Biology and Geobiology; Executive EngineeringVictoria J. Orphan, Ph.D.  James Irvine Professor of  Environmental Science and  Geobiology; Allen V. C. Davis and  Lenabelle Davis Leadership Chair,  Center for Microbial Interactions;  Director, Center for Microbial  InteractionsGeorge R. Rossman, Ph.D. Professor of Mineralogy Tapio Schneider, Ph.D.  Theodore Y. Wu Professor of  Environmental Science and  Engineering; JPL Senior Research  ScientistAlex L. Sessions, Ph.D. GeobiologyMark Simons, Ph.D. John W. and Herberta M. Miles  Professor of Geophysics; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Chief Scientist Joann M. Stock, Ph.D. Geology and GeophysicsEdward M. Stolper, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.  Robert Andrews Millikan Professor of  GeologyAndrew F. Thompson, Ph.D.   Environmental Science and  EngineeringMichael M. Watkins, Ph.D.  Aerospace and Geophysics Paul O. Wennberg, Ph.D.  R. Stanton Avery Professor of  Atmospheric Chemistry and Environmental Science and  EngineeringBrian P. Wernicke, Ph.D.  Chandler Family Professor of Geology Yuk L. Yung, Ph.D.  Planetary Science; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Senior Research Scientist Assistant Professors Claire Bucholz, Ph.D.  GeologyJörn Callies, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringKatherine de Kleer, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceZachary Ross, Ph.D. GeophysicsFrancois Tissot, Ph.D. GeochemistryZhongwen Zhan, Ph.D. GeophysicsLecturers Nathan Dalleska, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringYi Yin, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  Engineering769Geological and Planetary SciencesResearch Professor  Egill Hauksson, Ph.D. GeophysicsAllen Husker, Ph.D.  GeophysicsVisiting Associates Piyush Agram, Ph.D. GeophysicsElizabeth Cochran, Ph.D. GeophysicsAbigail Fraeman, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceMatthew Golombek, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceRobert W. Graves, Ph.D.  GeophysicsJohn M. Harris, Ph.D. GeologyRenyu Hu, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceLucile M. Jones, Ph.D. GeophysicsPatrice Klein, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringJunjie Liu, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringYang Liu, Ph.D.  GeochemistryDaniel J. McCleese, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringCharles Miller, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringVijay Natraj, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceKen Nealson, Ph.D. GeobiologyNga Lee (Sally) Ng, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringDimitri A. Papanastassiou, Ph.D. GeochemistryPaul Rosen, Ph.D. GeophysicsStanley P. Sander, Ph.D.  Planetary Science and Environmental  Science and EngineeringSue Smrekar, Ph.D.  GeophysicsMark Swain, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceJoao Teixeira, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  Engineering  Planetary ScienceVictor Tsai, Ph.D.  GeophysicsPaul Ullrich, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringJoan Valentine, Ph.D.  GeobiologyPaulo Vasconcelos, Ph.D.  GeochemistryDuane Waliser, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceGlenn Waychunas, Ph.D.  GeochemistryKenneth Williford, Ph.D.  GeobiologyHoward Zebker, Ph.D.  GeophysicsMembers of the Professional Staff  Michael B. Baker, Ph.D.  GeologyJohn R. Beckett, Ph.D. GeologyYunbin Guan, Ph.D.  GeochemistryChi Ma, Ph.D. GeochemistrySally Newman, Ph.D. Planetary Science770Trustees, Administration, Faculty Postdoctoral ScholarsMateo Acosta, Ph.D. GeologySajjad Azimi, Ph.D. Environmental Science and Engineer -ingEviatar Bach, Ph.D. Stanback Postdoctoral Scholar in Envi-ronmental Science and Engineering Juliette Becker, Ph.D.  Heising Simons Pegasi b Postdoctoral Scholar in Planetary ScienceMelanie Bieli, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringEttore Biondi, Ph.D.  GeophysicsIlya Bobrovskiy, Ph.D.  Texaco Prize Postdoctoral Scholar in  GeobiologyBenjamin Cardenas, Ph.D.  GeologyFrancisco Civilini, Ph.D. GeophysicsFei Dai, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceChloe Daudon, Ph.D. GeologyCharly de Marez, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringSijia Dong, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringDanielle Draper, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringOliver Dunbar, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringKieran Dunne, Ph.D. GeologyEryn Eitel, Ph.D. GeobiologyJoseph Fitzgerald, Ph.D. Foster and Coco Stanback Postdoctoral Scholar in Global Environmental Science Manuel Florez Torres, Ph.D.  GeophysicsDamanveer Grewal, Ph.D.  Barr Postdoctoral Scholar in GeologyMukund Gupta, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringJia He, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringZhengyu Huang, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringKyungjae Im, Ph.D. GeologyMichael Kipp, Ph.D. GeochemistryJoshua Laughner, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringGen Li, Ph.D. GeologyJiaxuan Li, Ph.D. GeophysicsTien-Hao Liao, Ph.D. GeochemistryXavier Mangenot, Ph.D. GeochemistryChristopher Mankovich, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceWei Mao, Ph.D.  GeophysicsRishav Mallick, Ph.D. Texaco Postdoctoral Scholar in Geo -physicsSelva Marroquin, Ph.D.  Texaco Postdoctoral Scholar in Geo -biologyFrancisco Martinez Hernandez, Ph.D.  GeobiologyMagdalena Mayr, Ph.D.  GeobiologyChristopher Milliner, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceYoshinori Miyazaki, Ph.D.  Stanback Postdoctoral in Comparative Planetary EvolutionKimberly Moore, Ph.D.  Planetary Science771Historical Sketch™771Geological and Planetary SciencesElizabeth Niespolo, Ph.D. GeochemistryFrank Pavia, Ph.D. Foster and Coco Stanback Postdoctoral Scholar in Environmental  Science and EngineeringThea Ragon, Ph.D. GeophysicsErik Ramirez Ramos, Ph.D.  GeophysicsGerard Salter, Ph.D.  Geology Stanback Postdoctoral Scholar in Envi-ronmental Science and Engineering Kriti Sharma, Ph.D. GeobiologyBenjamin Smith, Ph.D. GeologyAnezina Solomonidou, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceJessica Spake, Ph.D. Heising Simons Pegasi b Postdoctoral Scholar in Planetary ScienceNathan Stein, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceHongyu Sun, Ph.D. GeophysicsShantong Sun, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringRodney Tollerson, Ph.D.  GeobiologyDaniel Utter, Ph.D.  GeobiologyAna Beatriz Villa Boas, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and Engineer -ingYujie Wang, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringGabriella Weiss, Ph.D.  GeobiologyJasmina Wiemann, Ph.D. GeobiologyElise Wilkes, Ph.D. GeobiologyEarle Wilson, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringDien Wu, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringWenbo Wu, Ph.D.  GeophysicsHao Xie, Ph.D. GeochemistryYunjun Zhang, Ph.D.  GeophysicsZhimeng Zhang, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceYujie Zheng, Ph.D.  GeophysicsWeiqiang Zhu, Ph.D.  GeophysicsYanzhe Zhu, Ph.D.  GeobiologyVisitors Thamer Alotaibi Aldaajani, Ph.D. GeophysicsAlexis Bloom, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringTanja Bosak, Ph.D.  GeobiologyGerrit Budde, Ph.D. GeochemistryElle Chimiak, Ph.D. Geochemistry Max Coleman, Ph.D. GeochemistryValerie Fox, Ph.D.  Planetary Science  GeobiologyMurthy Gudipati, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceJamshid Hassanzadeh, PhD. GeologyAmy Hofmann, Ph.D. GeochemistryGregory Holk, Ph.D.  Geochemistry772Trustees, Administration, Faculty*Trustees, Administration, Faculty Martha House, Ph.D. GeologyRobert Housley, Ph.D.  GeochemistryAndrew Klesh, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceAtsuko Kobayashi, Ph.D. GeobiologyEllen Leask, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceCheng Li, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceZhu Liu, Ph.D. Environmental Science and  EngineeringDevin McPhillips, Ph.D. GeologyPaul Nerenberg, Ph.D.  Planetary ScienceSimon Cajetan Neubauer, Ph.D.  GeochemistryChristopher Parkinson, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceMaria Raguso, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceHaley Sapers, Ph.D. GeobiologyWolfgang Sturhahn, Ph.D.  GeophysicsNancy Thomas, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceDavid Thompson, Ph.D. Planetary ScienceDebra Wunch, Ph.D.  Environmental Science and  EngineeringHank Yu, Ph.D.  GeobiologyQing Yue, Ph.D.  Planetary Science773Historical Sketch(773Geological and Planetary SciencesDIVISION OF THE HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCESJean-Laurent Rosenthal  Ronald and Maxine Linde Leadership ChairRobert P. Sherman   SciencesChristopher R. Hitchcock  Professor Emeriti John Brewer, Ph.D.  Eli and Edythe Broad Professor of  History and Literature David M. Grether, Ph.D.  Frank J. Gilloon Professor of  Economics Daniel J. Kevles, Ph.D.  the HumanitiesJ. Morgan Kousser, Ph.D.  History and Social Science Jenijoy La Belle, Ph.D. English John O. Ledyard, Ph.D., D.Lit.h.c.  Allen and Lenabelle Davis Professor of  Economics and Social SciencesOscar Mandel, Ph.D. Literature  Robert A. Rosenstone, Ph.D. HistoryThayer Scudder, Ph.D.  Anthropology Annette J. Smith, Ph.D. Literature James F. Woodward, Ph.D.    of the HumanitiesProfessors Ralph Adolphs, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Psychology,  Neuroscience, and Biology Marina Agranov, Ph.D.  EconomicsR. Michael Alvarez, Ph.D.  Political ScienceWarren C. Brown, Ph.D.  HistoryJed Z. Buchwald, Ph.D. Doris and Henry Dreyfuss Professor of  HistoryColin F. Camerer, Ph.D.  Robert Kirby Professor of Behavioral  Economics; T&C Chen Center for Social and Decision Neuroscience  Leadership Chair; Director, T&C Chen  Center for Social and Decision Neuroscience Jaksa Cvitanic, Ph.D. Richard N. Merkin Professor of  Mathematical Finance; Director, Ronald  and Maxine Linde Institute of Economic and Management SciencesTracy K. Dennison, Ph.D.  HistoryFrederick Eberhardt, Ph.D.  PhilosophyFederico M. Echenique, Ph.D. Allen and Lenabelle Davis Professor  of EconomicsJean E. Ensminger, Ph.D.  Edie and Lew Wasserman Professor of  Social SciencesMichael J. Ewens, Ph.D. EconomicsMordechai Feingold, Ph.D.  Kate Van Nuys Page Professor of the  History of Science and the Humanities Kevin M. Gilmartin, Ph.D. William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of  English; Allen V.C. Davis and Lenabelle    Dehn Gilmore, Ph.D.  EnglishKristine L. Haugen, Ph.D. EnglishAlexander V. Hirsch, Ph.D.  Political Science Christopher R. Hitchcock, Ph.D.  Philosophy774Trustees, Administration, Faculty   Rea A. and Lela G. Axline Professor of  Business Economics and HistoryJoceyln Holland, Ph.D. German StudiesBrian R. Jacobson, Ph.D. Critical StudiesJennifer A. Jahner, Ph.D.  English Catherine Jurca, Ph.D.  EnglishJonathan N. Katz, Ph.D. Kay Sugahara Professor of Social  Sciences and StatisticsD. Roderick Kiewiet, Ph.D. Political ScienceDiana L. Kormos-Buchwald, Ph.D. Robert M. Abbey Professor of History Dean Mobbs, Ph.D. Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience;  Allen V. C. Davis and Lenabelle Davis  Leadership Chair, Caltech Brain Im -aging Center; Director, Caltech Brain  Imaging CenterJohn P. O™Doherty, Ph.D.  PsychologyPeter C. Ordeshook, Ph.D.  Political ScienceThomas R. Palfrey III, Ph.D.  Flintridge Foundation Professor of  Economics and Political ScienceGeorge Pigman III, Ph.D. EnglishCharles R. Plott, Ph.D. Doctor of Letters, honoris causa William D. Hacker Professor of  Economics and Political ScienceSteven R. Quartz, Ph.D. PhilosophyAntonio Rangel, Ph.D. Bing Professor of Neuroscience,  Behavioral Biology, and Economics Richard W. Roll, Ph.D.  Linde Institute Professor of Finance Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Ph.D.  Rea A. and Lela G. Axline Professor of  Business Economics; Ronald and Maxine Linde Leadership Chair,  Division of the Humanities and Social SciencesKota Saito, Ph.D. EconomicsRobert P. Sherman, Ph.D.  Economics and StatisticsMatthew S. Shum, Ph.D. J. Stanley Johnson Professor of  EconomicsCharles D. Sprenger, Ph.D.  EconomicsOmer Tamuz, Ph.D.  Economics Cindy A. Weinstein, Ph.D.  Eli and Edythe Broad Professor of   EnglishNicolas Wey-Gomez, Ph.D.  HistoryAssistant Professors Maura D. Dykstra, Ph.D. HistoryMichael B. Gibilisco, Ph.D. Political ScienceLawrence J. Jin, Ph.D.  FinanceGabriel Lopez-Moctezuma, Ph.D. Political ScienceEric Mazumdar, Ph.D.  Computing and Mathematical Sciences and Economics Dana Murphy, Ph.D.  EnglishKirby Nielsen, Ph.D. EconomicsLuciano Pomatto, Ph.D. EconomicsLisa Ruth Rand, Ph.D. HistoryCharles T. Sebens, Ph.D.  PhilosophyDanielle L. Wiggins, Ph.D. History Yi Xin, Ph.D.  EconomicsAhmanson Postdoctoral Instructor775Historical Sketch*775Humanities and Social SciencesCharles A. Kollmer, Ph.D.  History of ScienceCaltech-Huntington Humanities Collaborations Postdoctoral Instructor and Rothenberg  Postdoctoral InstructorJonathan Koch, Ph.D. English Fletcher Jones Postdoctoral Instructor  Julia M. Hori, Ph.D. English Jessen Postdoctoral InstructorsAndrew Hill, Ph.D.  EnglishMario Hubert, Ph.D.  Philosophy Hannah F. LeBlanc, Ph.D.  HistoryAdam K. Pham, Ph.D.  Philosophy Rothenberg Postdoctoral Instructor Anne Sullivan, Ph.D. EnglishWeisman Postdoctoral Instructor John V. Decemvirale, Ph.D.  Art HistoryPostdoctoral Instructor in Early Modern Natural Philosophy Margaret Gaida, Ph.D.  History of Science, Medicine, and Technology Postdoctoral InstructorsFarzad Pourbabaee, Ph.D. EconomicsFedor Sandomirskii, Ph.D. Economics Juni Singh, Ph.D. EconomicsLecturers Andreas Aebi, Ph.D.     GermanGloria Arjona, Ph.D. Spanish  R. Matthew Brown, D.M.A.  CompositionChristine M. Daley, Ph.D.  EnglishJennifer L. Factor, M.F.A.  Literature and Creative Writing Megumi Fujio, Ph.D. JapaneseDaniel A. Garcia, M.A.   Spanish Eulalia Halloran, M.F.A.  Painting in PrintmakingRitsuko Hirai Toner, Ph.D.  Japanese Richard E. Kipling, M.A.   Journalism  Edan Lepucki, MFA  FictionDaniel Lewis, Ph.D. HistoryNareen Manoukian, Ed.D.  Higher Education  Finance Trevor C. Merrill, Ph.D.  French Feng-Ying Ming, Ph.D.  ChineseChristiane H. Orcel, Ph.D.  French  Josh Schneiderman, Ph.D. English Melanie Sherazi, Ph.D. English Elin O™Hara Slavick, M.F.A.  Photography Xiangyun Wang, Ph.D.  Chinese776Trustees, Administration, Faculty Kenneth J. Winston, Ph.D. EconomicsJuliann K. Wolfgram, Ph.D.   Art HistoryResearch Professor Hillary Mushkin, M.F.A.  Art and Design and Humanities and Social Sciences Moore Scholar Luigi Zingales, Ph.D. EconomicsResearch Assistant Professors Joshua Eisenthal, Ph.D.  PhilosophyJennifer L. Rodgers, Ph.D. HistoryTeaching Professor Susanne E. Hall, Ph.D. Teaching Professor of Writing and  Director of the Hixon Writing Center Eleanor Searle Visiting Professor Alexander C.T. Geppert, Ph.D.  History Hanna Rose Shell, Ph.D. History of Science Visiting Professor    Steve Hindle, Ph.D. History Visiting Associate Professor Catherine E. Clark, Ph.D. HistoryVisiting Associates Marco Battaglini, Ph.D.  EconomicsJames K. Chandler, Ph.D.  EnglishJernej Copic, Ph.D.  Social SciencesAnthony Grafton, Ph.D. History John L. Heilbron, Ph.D.  HistoryJozsef Illy, Ph.D.  HistoryDorit Kliemann, Ph.D. Cognitive Neuroscience Anne J. Kox, Ph.D. HistoryDennis Lehmkuhl, Ph.D. Philosophy Barbara B. Oberg, Ph.D. HistoryEleonora Patacchini, Ph.D. EconomicsRobert C. Ritchie, Ph.D. History Mary Elise Sarotte, Ph.D.  History Tilman Sauer, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics Mark J. Schiefsky, Ph.D.  Philosophy Wolfram Schultz, Ph.D.  Neuroscience Damian Stanley, Ph.D.  Neuroeconomics Reza Tadayon Nejad, M.D., Ph.D.  Neuroscience  Anita Tusche, Ph.D.  PsychologyMichael Woodford, Ph.D.  EconomicsJulia Zhu, Ph.D. French Literature 777Historical Sketchu777Humanities and Social Sciences778Trustees, Administration, Faculty1Visitors Julien Dubois, Ph.D. Neuroscience Zhongzheng Fu, Ph.D. Control and Dynamical Systems Cindy Hagan, Ph.D. Psychology Laura Harrison, Ph.D. Neuroscience Chujun Lin, Ph.D. Social SciencesTetsuro Matsuzawa, Ph.D.  ScienceJuri Minxha, Ph.D. Computation and Neural Systems Toby Wise, Ph.D.  Neuroscience Member of the Professional Staff  Ze™ev Rosenkranz, M.L.S.Senior Postdoctoral ScholarsCaroline J. Charpentier, Ph.D.  Neuroscience    Neuroscience  Postdoctoral ScholarsAlexander W. Bloedel, PhD.  Economics Patrick Burauel, Ph.D. Humanities & Social Sciences Jian Cao, Ph.D. Data Science and Election IntegrityAyse Zeynep Enkavi, Ph.D.  Neuroeconomics Cooper Grossman, PhD.  Neuroscience  Umit Keles, Ph.D. Neuroscience Jaejoong Kim, PhD. Affective Neuroscience Na Yeon Kim, Ph.D.  Neuroscience  Lisa Kluen, Ph.D. Neuroscience Xiaomin Li, Ph.D. Behavioral Economics & Neuroeco -nomicsVincent Y. Man, Ph.D.  Neuroscience Tanaz Molapour, Ph.D.  Computational Affective Neuroscience Omar D. Perez, Ph.D.  Neuroscience Nina Rouhani, Ph.D. Neuroscience  Tessa Rusch, Ph.D.  Neuroscience Sarah Tashjian, Ph.D.  Affective Neuroscience  Cristiano Zanetti, Ph.D. History of ScienceTomislav D. Zbozinek, Ph.D.   Qing (Robin) Zhao, Ph.D. Political ScienceTrustees, Administration, Faculty 779DIVISION OF PHYSICS, MATHEMATICS AND  ASTRONOMYFiona A. Harrison Kent and Joyce Kresa Leadership Chair Sunil Golwala  -physicsPhilip F. Hopkins   Eric M. Rains Alan J. Weinstein  Sunil Golwala Director, Caltech Submillimeter  ObservatoryGregg W. Hallinan  Director, Owens Valley Radio Obser -vatoryGeorge Helou Executive Director of the Infrared Pro -cessing and Analysis Center (IPAC) Hiroshi Ooguri  Director, Burke Institute for Theoretical  PhysicsJohn P. Preskill  Allen V.C. Davis and Lenabelle Davis  Leadership Chair, Institute for Quantum  Science and Technology (IQIM) Thomas A. Prince Director, W.M. Keck Institute for Space  Studies; Allen V.C. Davis and Lenabelle  Davis Leadership Chair, Keck Institute  for Space Studies (KISS)David H. Reitze Executive Director of the LIGO Project  (Laser Interferometer Gravitation -al-Wave Observatory) B. Thomas Soifer Director, Spitzer Science Center Jonas Zmuidzinas Director, Caltech Optical Observatories Professors Emeriti Michael Aschbacher, Ph.D.  Shaler Arthur Hanisch Professor of  MathematicsBarry C. Barish, Ph.D., Laurea h.c.,  Nobel Laureate  Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of  PhysicsJudith G. Cohen, Ph.D. Kate Van Nuys Page Professor of  Astronomy Marshall H. Cohen, Ph.D. Astronomy Michael C. Cross, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics Richard A. Dean, Ph.D.  MathematicsJames P. Eisenstein, Ph.D.  Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics  and Applied PhysicsSteven C. Frautschi, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Peter M. Goldreich, Ph.D.  Lee A. DuBridge Professor of Astro -physics and Planetary PhysicsDavid L. Goodstein, Ph.D. Frank J. Gilloon Distinguished Teaching  and Service Professor and Professor of  Physics and Applied Physics William L. Valentine Professor of  Physics Gary A. Lorden, Ph.D.  MathematicsThomas G. Phillips, Ph.D, D.Phil. John D. MacArthur Professor of  PhysicsThomas A. Prince, Ph.D. Ira S. Bowen Professor of Physics  Anthony C. Readhead, Ph.D. Robinson Professor of Astronomy Anneila I. Sargent, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Ira S. Bowen Professor of Astronomy Maarten Schmidt, Ph.D., Sc.D. Francis L. Moseley Professor of  Astronomy John H. Schwarz, Ph.D. Harold Brown Professor of Theoretical  PhysicsNicholas Z. Scoville, Ph.D. Francis L. Moseley Professor of  Astronomy 779Humanities and Social SciencesBarry M. Simon, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. IBM Professor of Mathematics and  Theoretical Physics B. Thomas Soifer, Ph.D.  Harold Brown Professor of Physics Kip S. Thorne, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.h.c.,  L.H.D.h.c., Nobel Laureate  Richard P. Feynman Professor of  Theoretical Physics Rochus E. Vogt, Ph.D.  R. Stanton Avery Distinguished Service  Professor and Professor of Physics David B. Wales, Ph.D.  MathematicsRichard M. Wilson, Ph.D.  MathematicsSenior Research Associate Emeritus Petr Vogel, Ph.D.  PhysicsProfessors Rana Adhikari, Ph.D. PhysicsJason Alicea, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics James J. Bock, Ph.D. PhysicsFernando Guadalupe Dos Santos Lins  Brandão, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Theoretical Physics Xie Chen, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Yanbei Chen, Ph.D.  Physics  Theoretical Physics Ibrahim Cissé, Ph.D. PhysicsDavid Conlon, Ph.D. MathematicsS. George Djorgovski, Ph.D. Astronomy Manuel A. Endres, Ph.D.  Physics Bradley W. Filippone, Ph.D.  Francis L. Moseley Professor of  PhysicsMatthias Flach, Ph.D. MathematicsSunil Golwala, Ph.D. PhysicsThomas Graber, Ph.D.  MathematicsSergei Gukov, Ph.D.  John D. MacArthur Professor of  Theoretical Physics and Mathematics Gregg W. Hallinan, Ph.D.  Astronomy Fiona A. Harrison, Ph.D., D.techn.h.c. Harold A. Rosen Professor of Physics  Lynne Hillenbrand, Ph.D.  Astronomy David G. Hitlin, Ph.D. PhysicsPhilip F. Hopkins, Ph.D.   Theoretical Astrophysics Andrew W. Howard, Ph.D.  Astronomy David Hsieh, Ph.D. PhysicsThomas Hutchcroft, Ph.D.  MathematicsPhilip Isett, Ph.D. Mathematics Anton Kapustin, Ph.D. Earle C. Anthony Professor of  Theoretical Physics and Mathematics Mansi M. Kasliwal, Ph.D. Astronomy  Nets Katz, Ph.D. International Business Machines Pro -fessor of MathematicsAlexander S. Kechris, Ph.D., D.h.c. MathematicsAlexei Kitaev, Ph.D.  Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of  Theoretical Physics & Mathematics Shrinivas R. Kulkarni, Ph.D.  George Ellery Hale Professor of Astron -omy and Planetary ScienceKenneth G. Libbrecht, Ph.D.  Physics780Trustees, Administration, Faculty6Trustees, Administration, Faculty 781Nikolai G. Makarov, Ph.D.  Richard Merkin Distinguished Professor  of MathematicsElena Mantovan, Ph.D. MathematicsMatilde Marcolli, Ph.D.  Robert F. Christy Professor of Mathe -matics and Computing and Mathemat-ical SciencesChristopher Martin, Ph.D. PhysicsDimitri P.Q. Mawet, Ph.D.  Astronomy Olexei Motrunich, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Harvey B. Newman, Sc.D, D.h.c., Marvin L. Goldberger Professor of  PhysicsYi Ni, Ph.D  MathematicsHiroshi Ooguri, Ph.D.  Fred Kavli Professor of Theoretical  Physics and MathematicsOskar J. Painter, Ph.D.  John G. Braun Professor of Applied  Physics and PhysicsRyan Patterson, Ph.D. PhysicsRobert B. Phillips, Ph.D. Fred and Nancy Morris Professor of  Biophysics, Biology and PhysicsE. Sterl Phinney, Ph.D.   Theoretical Astrophysics H. David Politzer, Ph.D., Nobel  Laureate  Richard Chace Tolman Professor of  Theoretical Physics Frank C. Porter, Ph.D.  PhysicsJohn P. Preskill, Ph.D.  Richard P. Feynman Professor of Theo -retical Physics Maksym Radziwill, Ph.D. MathematicsEric M. Rains, Ph.D. MathematicsDinakar Ramakrishnan, Ph.D. Taussky-Todd-Lonergan Professor of  MathematicsGil Refael, Ph.D. Taylor W. Lawrence Professor of Theo -retical Physics Thomas F. Rosenbaum, Ph.D.  PhysicsMichael L. Roukes, Ph.D. Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics,  Applied Physics and Bioengineering Theoretical Physics Axel Scherer, Ph.D.  Bernard Neches Professor of Electrical  Engineering, Applied Physics and Physics; Merkin Institute Professor Maria Spiropulu, Ph.D.  Shang-Yi Ch'en Professor of Physics Charles C. Steidel, Ph.D. Lee A. DuBridge Professor of Astron -omyEdward C. Stone, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.  David W. Morrisroe Professor of  PhysicsOmer Tamuz, Ph.D.  Economics and MathematicsSaul Teukolsky, Ph.D.  Robinson Professor of Theoretical  Astrophysics Alan J. Weinstein, Ph.D.  PhysicsMark B. Wise, Ph.D. John A. McCone Professor of High  Energy Physics Nai-Chang Yeh, Ph.D.  PhysicsTony Yue Yu, Ph.D.  MathematicsXinwen Zhu, Ph.D. MathematicsJonas Zmuidzinas, Ph.D. Merle Kingsley Professor of Physics Kathryn M. Zurek, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics 781Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy Assistant Professors Katherine Bouman, Ph.D. Astronomy Katerina Chatziioannou, Ph.D. PhysicsKatherine De Kleer, Ph.D.  Astronomy James Fuller, Ph.D.  Theoretical Astrophysics Nicholas R. Hutzler, Ph.D.,  PhysicsVikram Ravi, Ph.D.  Astronomy  InstructorsIoannis Angelopoulos, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Mathematics  Yesim Demiroglu, Ph.D.  Hearst, MathematicsAlexander Dunn, Ph.D. Olga Taussky & John Todd, Mathe -maticsMikhail Karpukhin, Ph.D. Harry Bateman, MathematicsAaron Mazel-Gee, Ph.D.  Sherman Fairchild Mathematics Abhishek Oswal, Ph.D. Harry Bateman, MathematicsBjarne Schülke, Ph.D.  Harry Bateman, MathematicsPeter Smillie, Ph.D. Harry Bateman, MathematicsAnna Szumowicz, Ph.D. Harry Bateman, MathematicsZoltan Vidnyanszky, Ph.D.  Olga Taussky & John Todd, Mathe -maticsJuan Pablo Vigneaux, Ph.D.  Olga Taussky & John Todd, Mathe -maticsShukun Wu, Ph.D.  Olga Taussky & John Todd, Mathe -maticsLecturers Eric D. Black, Ph.D. PhysicsSergi R. Hildebrandt, Ph.D. PhysicsHien T. Nguyen, Ph.D.  PhysicsFrank Rice, M.S. PhysicsResearch Professors Sean Carroll, Ph.D.  PhysicsBertrand Echenard, Ph.D.   PhysicsMatthew Graham, Ph.D. Astronomy George Helou, Ph.D. PhysicsEvan Kirby, Ph.D.  Astronomy Richard A. Mewaldt, Ph.D.  PhysicsStephen Padin, Ph.D. PhysicsMichele Papucci, Ph.D. PhysicsDavid H. Reitze, Ph.D. Physics Jack Sayers, Ph.D. PhysicsMark Scheel, Ph.D. PhysicsDaniel M. Silevitch, Ph.D. PhysicsResearch Assistant Professors Javier Garcia, Ph.D.  PhysicsChristopher Swank, Ph.D. PhysicsSi Xie, Ph.D. Physics782Trustees, Administration, Faculty5Trustees, Administration, Faculty Senior Faculty AssociatesCharles Beichman, Ph.D. Astronomy Curt Cutler, Ph.D.  PhysicsOlivier Doré, Ph.D.  PhysicsVisiting Associates James Bartlett, Ph.D. PhysicsCharles Matt Bradford, Ph.D.  PhysicsAsantha Cooray, Ph.D.  PhysicsAbigail Crites, Ph.D. PhysicsClive Dickinson, Ph.D Astronomy Richard Ellis, Ph.D.  Astronomy Yejun Feng, Ph.D.  PhysicsPaul Goldsmith, Ph.D. PhysicsSergi R. Hildebrandt, Ph.D. PhysicsRoy J. Holt, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Joseph W. Lazio, Ph.D.  Astronomy Patrick Lee, Ph.D. PhysicsWalid Majid, Ph.D.  PhysicsSimona Mei, Ph.D. PhysicsMassimo Meneghetti, Ph.D. PhysicsHien T. Nguyen, Ph.D.  PhysicsShouleh Nikzad, Ph.D. PhysicsAnamparambu N. Ramaprakash, Ph.D. Astrophysics Michael Ramsey-Musolf, Ph.D. PhysicsAndrés Romero-Wolf, Ph.D.  Astronomy John Elie Sader, Ph.D.  PhysicsPiotr Sulkowski, Ph.D. PhysicsMichele Vallisneri, Ph.D.  PhysicsSander Weinreb Ph.D.  Astronomy Michael Werner, Ph.D.  Astrophysics Mark E. Wiedenbeck, Ph.D. PhysicsMembers of the Professional Staff Rachel Akeson, Ph.D. Stuart Anderson, Ph.D. Philip Appleton, Ph.D. Jessica Arlett, Ph.D. Lee Armus, Ph.D. Thomas Barlow, Ph.D.  Bruce Berriman, Ph.D. James Kent Blackburn, Ph.D.  Andrew Boden, Ph.D.  Julian Bunn, Ph.D. Peter L. Capak, Ph.D. Sean J. Carey, Ph.D.  Robert Carr, M.Phil  Ranga Ram Chary, Ph.D.  David R. Ciardi, Ph.D.  Kieran A. Cleary, Ph.D.  Christina M. S. Cohen, Ph.D. Walter R. Cook, Ph.D.  Dennis C. Coyne, M.S. Alan C. Cummings, Ph.D. Roc Cutri, Ph.D. Richard Dekany, Ph.D.  Chung Wah (Warren) Fon, Ph.D.  Valery Frolov, Ph.D.  Joseph A. Giaime, Ph.D. Carl Grillmair, Ph.D.  Eric K. Gustafson, Ph.D. Keita Kawabe, Ph.D. Davy Kirkpatrick, Ph.D.Phillip Korngut, PhD.  Michael Landry, Ph.D.  Albert Lazzarini, Ph.D. Janice Lee, Ph.D. Richard A. Leske, Ph.D.  William Mahoney, Ph.D.  Joseph Mazzarella, Ph.D.  Gregory Mendell, Ph.D.  Patrick Morris, Ph.D. 783783Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy 784Trustees, Administration, Faculty7Trustees, Administration, Faculty J. E. Brian O™Reilly, Ph.D. Roberta Paladini, PhD. Fredrick J. Raab, Ph.D.  Luisa M. Rebull, Ph.D. Reed Riddle, Ph.D. Norna A. Robertson, Ph.D.  Gary H. Sanders, Ph.D. Richard Savage, Ph.D.  Patrick Shopbell, Ph.D. David Shupe, Ph.D. Daniel Sigg, Ph.D. Nancy Silbermann, Ph.D. Roger Smith, B.E. Gordon Squires, Ph.D.  Harry Teplitz, Ph.D.  Schuyler Van Dyk, Ph.D.  Yun Wang, Ph.D.  David P. Woody, Ph.D.  Hiroaki Yamamoto, Ph.D.  Lin Yan, Ph.D.  Ren-Yuan Zhu, Ph.D.  Michael Zucker, Ph.D.  John Zweizig, Ph.D. Postdoctoral ScholarsAlina Aleksandrova, Ph.D.  PhysicsAshley Baker, Ph.D.  51 Pegasi b, Astronomy Ritoban Basu Thakur, Ph.D.  PhysicsNathan Benjamin, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Arielle Bertrou-Cantou Ph.D.  Astronomy Bryce Bolin, Ph.D. Astronomy Luke Bouma, Ph.D. 51 Pegasi b, Astronomy McKinley Brumback, Ph.D. PhysicsIryna Butsky, Ph.D.  Dubridge, Theoretical Astrophysics Ruby Byrne, Ph.D.  Astronomy Craig Cahillane, Ph.D. PhysicsIlaria Caiazzo, Ph.D. Theoretical Astrophysics Yun-Ting Chen, Ph.D.  PhysicsJoonhee Choi, Ph.D. PhysicsLiam Connor, Ph.D.  Tolman, Astronomy Riley Connors, Ph.D. PhysicsPouria Dadras, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Derek Davis, Ph.D.  PhysicsSinan Deger, Ph.D.  Astronomy Jérôme Deprince, Ph.D. PhysicsAbhinav Deshpande, Ph.D. Theoretical Astrophysics Yehonathan Drori, Ph.D.  PhysicsArpit Dua, Ph.D. IQIM, Theoretical Physics Tega Edo, Ph.D.  PhysicsAndreas Elben, Ph.D.  Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Iliya Esin, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Ran Finkelstein, Ph.D. Experimental Prize, PhysicsKyle Finner, Ph.D.  Astronomy   Astronomy  Astronomy Pradip Gatkine, Ph.D. Hubble, Astronomy Tuvia Gefen, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics Hrant Gharibyan, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Sepehr Ghazi Nezami, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Sivan Ginzburg, Ph.D. 51 Pegasi b, Theoretical Astrophysics Yingfei Gu, Ph.D.  IFQ, Theoretical Physics 785Historical Sketch5Chen Heinrich, Ph.D. PhysicsAndreas Helset, Ph.D.  Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Cameron Hummels, Ph.D.  Theoretical Astrophysics Marziye Jafariyazani, Ph.D. Astronomy Alexander Jahn, Ph.D. IQIM, Theoretical Physics Amruta Jaodand, Ph.D. PhysicsFangzhou Jiang, Ph.D. Troesh, Theoretical Astrophysics Nikita Kamraj, Ph.D. PhysicsJae Hwan Kang, Ph.D. PhysicsMonica Kang, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Adithan Kathirgamaraju, Ph.D. Theoretical Astrophysics Junhan Kim, Ph.D. Robert A. Millikan, PhysicsNatalie Klco, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Kyle Kremer, Ph.D.  NSF, Theoretical Astrophysics Michael Kuhn, Ph.D. Astronomy Yuya Kusuki, Ph.D.  Brinson, Theoretical Physics Shao-Lu Lai, Ph.D. Astronomy Étienne Lantagne-Hurbutise, Ph.D. Moore, Theoretical Physics Anthony LaTorre, Ph.D.  David & Ellen Lee, PhysicsNikolai Lauk, Ph.D. PhysicsMargaret Lazzarini, Ph.D.  NSF, Physics Shing Chi Leung, Ph.D. Theoretical Astrophysics  Cyprian Lewandowski, Ph.D. Moore, Theoretical Physics Dongzi Li, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Astronomy Xiang Li, Ph.D. PhysicsXinwei Li, Ph.D. Troesh, Physics Jorge Llop-Sayson, Ph.D. Astronomy Nan Lu, Ph.D. PhysicsRenee Ludlam, Ph.D. Einstein, PhysicsRyan Magee, Ph.D. PhysicsLabani Mallick, Ph.D. PhysicsGuglielmo Mastroserio, Ph.D.  PhysicsSaeed Mehraban, Ph.D. IQIM, Theoretical Physics Patrick Meyers, Ph.D. Theoretical Astrophysics Sophie Middleton, Ph.D. PhysicsDrew Miles, Ph.D.  PhysicsAndrea Mitridate, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics Kunal Mooley, Ph.D.  Astronomy Sanjay Moudgalya, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Clara Murgui Galvez, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Masayuki Nakano, Ph.D. PhysicsFrederik Nathan, Ph.D.  Theoretical Physics Chi Nguyen, Ph.D. PhysicsRyo Noguchi, Ph.D. JSPS, PhysicsGeorgia Panopoulou, Ph.D. Hubble, Theoretical Astrophysics Julio Parra-Martinez, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics 785Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy 786Trustees, Administration, Faculty9Vinand Prayag, Ph.D.  Astronomy Karthik Ramanathan, Ph.D. Troesh, Physics Bin Ren, Ph.D. Astronomy Arianna Renzini, Ph.D. Physics David & Ellen Lee, Astronomy Francisco Salces Carcoba, Ph.D.  Barish-Weiss, Physics Pascal Scholl, Ph.D. PhysicsKyle Seyler, Ph.D.   PhysicsJun Shi, Ph.D. Astronomy Shibo Shu, Ph.D. PhysicsDana Simard, Ph.D.  Astronomy Ashmeet Singh, Ph.D. PhysicsKevin Slagle, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Niharika Sravan, Ph.D. Astronomy Robert Stein, Ph.D. Astronomy Federica Surace, Ph.D. Theoretical Physics Kathryn Sutton, Ph.D. David & Ellen Lee, PhysicsColm Talbot, Ph.D.  PhysicsNiclas Technau, Ph.D.  NSF, Math Alex Thomson, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Nina Vaidya, Ph.D.  PhysicsRaju Valivarthi, Ph.D.  PhysicsZoya Vallari, Ph.D.  PhysicsJoannes van Roestel, Ph.D. PhysicsZachary Vanderbosch, Ph.D.  PhysicsJason Wang, Ph.D.  51 Pegasi b, Astronomy Xin Wang, Ph.D.  Astronomy Yikun Wang, Ph.D.  David & Ellen Lee, Theoretical Physics Jordan Wilson-Gerow Ph.D.  Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Astro -physicsXin Xie, Ph.D. IQIM, Theoretical Physics Yanjun Xu, Ph.D.  PhysicsHang Yu, Ph.D.  Sherman Fairchild, Physics Chi Zhang, Ph.D. David & Ellen Lee, PhysicsPengfei Zhang, Ph.D. Sherman Fairchild, Theoretical Physics Sisi Zhou, Ph.D. IQIM, Theoretical Physics Trustees, Administration, Faculty 787Historical Sketch787Historical SketchuJet Propulsion Laboratory JET PROPULSION LABORATORY Administered by Caltech for the  Administered by Caltech for the  National Aeronautics and Space  AdministrationLarry D. James Acting Director Executive CouncilDavid Gallagher Associate Director for Strategy, Tech -nology and FormulationLeslie L. Livesay Associate Director for Flight Projects  and Mission SuccessRobert D. Braun Director for Solar System Exploration Suzanne Dodd Director for Interplanetary Network Marc J. Goettel  Director for Business Operations James E. Graf Director for Earth Science and Tech -nologyW. Michael Greene  Director for Communications and  EducationFred Hadaegh  Chief Technologist Cozette M. Hart Director for Human Resources Sammy Kayali Laboratory Operations Integration Randi Levin  for Information and Technology Solu -tions Directorate Jennifer Lum Caltech General CounselPhilip Morton Director for Safety and Mission  SuccessKeyur C. Patel Director for Astronomy and Physics Mark Simons Chief ScientistCharles W. Whetsel  Director for Engineering and Science 788Trustees, Administration, Faculty;OFFICERS AND FACULTY Thomas F Rosenbaum, Ph.D. President; Sonja and William Davidow  Presidential Chair; Professor of Physics  A.B., Harvard College, 1977; M.A.,  Princeton University, 1979; Ph.D.,  1982. Caltech, 2014-; President, 2014-. John N Abelson, Ph.D. George Beadle Professor of Biology,  Emeritus B.S., Washington State University,  1960; Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University,  1965. Professor, Caltech, 1982-91;  Beadle Professor, 1991-2002; Beadle  Professor Emeritus, 2002-. Chair,  Division of Biology, 1989-95. Yaser Abu-Mostafa, Ph.D.  Professor of Electrical Engineering and  Computer Science B.Sc., Cairo University, 1979; M.S.E.E.,  Georgia Institute of Technology, 1981;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1983. Garrett Research  Fellow in Electrical Engineering, 1983; Assistant Professor, 1983-89; Asso -ciate Professor, 1989-94; Professor,  1994-.Rana Adhikari, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.S., University of Florida (Gainesville), 1998; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2004. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2006-12; Professor, 2012-. Jess F Adkins, Ph.D. Smits Family Professor of Geochemis -try and Global Environmental Science,  B.S., Haverford College, 1990; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1998. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2000-06; Associate Professor,  2006-10; Professor, 2010-16; Smits  Professor, 2017-. Ralph Adolphs, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Psychology, Neuro -science, and Biology B.S., Stanford University, 1986; M.S.,  1986; Ph.D., Caltech, 1993. Professor  of Psychology and Neuroscience,  2004-05; Bren Professor, 2005-;  Professor of Biology, 2005-17; Davis  Leadership Chair, 2017-21; Director,  Caltech Brain Imaging Center, 2008- 13, 2017-21.Andreas Aebi  Lecturer in German  M.A., University of Southern California,  1970; Ph.D., 1974. Lecturer in French,  Caltech, 1978; Lecturer in German,  1978-83; 1986-; Instructor in German, 1983-1986.Theodor Agapie, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry; Executive  Officer for Chemistry  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2001; Ph.D., Caltech, 2007.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2009-14;  Professor, 2014-; Executive Officer,  2021-.Piyush S Agram Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.Tech., Indian Institute of Technol -ogy of Madras, 2004; M.S., Stanford  University, 2006; Ph.D., 2010. Caltech,  2014-23.Marina Agranov, Ph.D.  Professor of Economics  B.A., St. Petersburg State Technical  University, 1999; M.A., Tel Aviv Univer -sity, 2004; Ph.D., New York University,  2010. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2010-17; Professor, 2017-. Channing C Ahn Lecturer in Applied Physics and  Materials Science B.S., University of California, 1979;  M.S., 1981; Ph.D., University of Bristol, 1985. Senior Research Fellow, Caltech,  1987-92; Senior Research Associate,  1992-2014; Lecturer, 1988; 1990-2009;  2010; 2016-2021.Arden L Albee, Ph.D.  Professor of Geology and Planetary  Science, Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1950; A.M.,  Harvard University, 1951; Ph.D., 1957.  Visiting Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1959-60; Associate Professor of  Geology,  1960-66; Professor, 1966-99;  Professor of Geology and Plane -tary Science, 1999-2002; Professor  Emeritus, 2002-. Academic  Officer,  Geological and Planetary Sciences, 1971-79; Chief Scientist, Jet Propul -sion Laboratory, 1979-84; Dean of  Graduate Studies, 1984-2000.Bridget A Alex Lecturer in Anthropology,  B.A., Dartmouth College, 2008; M.A., Harvard University, 2012; Ph.D., 2016.  Caltech, 2019-21.Trustees, Administration, Faculty 789Jason Alicea, Ph.D. Professor of Theoretical Physics,  B.S., University of Florida, 2001; M.A., University of California (Santa  Barbara), 2005; Ph.D., 2007. Associate Professor, Caltech, 2012-15; Professor,  2015-.John M Allman, Ph.D. Frank P. Hixon Professor of Neurobi -ology B.A., University of Virginia, 1965;  A.M., University of Chicago, 1968; Ph.D., 1971. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1974-77; Associate Professor,  1977-84; Professor, 1984-89; Hixon  Professor, 1989-.  Visiting Professor in Mathematics  M.S., University of Turin, 1983; Ph.D.,  Brown University, 1987. Professor,  Florida State University, 2000-.  Caltech, 2008-21.R M Alvarez, Ph.D.  Professor of Political and Computation -al Social Science B.A., Carleton College, 1986; M.A., Duke University, 1990; Ph.D., 1992.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1992- 95; Associate Professor, 1995-2002;  Professor, 2002-. Aaron D Ames, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Mechanical and  Civil Engineering and Control and  Dynamical Systems, B.S., University of St. Thomas, 2001; B.A., University of St. Thomas, 2001; M.A., University of California, Berkeley, 2006; Ph.D., 2006.  Lecturer, Caltech, 2007; Professor,  2017; Bren Professor, 2017-. Qi An Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.S., University of Science and Tech -nology of China, 2002; M.S., 2007; M.S., California Institute of Technology,  2009; Ph.D., 2012.  Caltech, 2018-20.Animashree Anandkumar, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., Indian Institutes of Technology,  2004; Ph.D., Cornell University, 2009;  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2017; Bren  Professor, 2017-. Richard A Andersen, Ph.D.  James G. Boswell Professor of Neurosci -ence; T&C Chen Brain-Machine Interface  Center Leadership Chair; Director, T&C  Brain-Machine Interface Center B.S., University of California (Davis),  1973; Ph.D., University of California  (San Francisco), 1979. Boswell Profes -sor, Caltech, 1993-; Chen Brain-Ma -chine Interface Center Leadership Chair, 2017-; Director, 2017-. David J Anderson, Ph.D. Seymour Benzer Professor of Biology;  Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute for Neuroscience Leadership Chair;  Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical  Institute; Director, Tianqiao and Chrissy  Chen Institute for Neuroscience  A.B., Harvard University, 1978; Ph.D.,  Rockefeller University, 1983. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1986-92; Associate  Professor, 1992-96; Professor, 1996- 2004; Roger W. Sperry Professor,  2004-09; Benzer Professor, 2009-;  Chen Institute for Neuroscience Lead -ership Chair, 2017-; HHMI Investigator,  1989-; Director, 2017-. Jose E Andrade, Ph.D. George W. Housner Professor of Civil  and Mechanical Engineering; Cecil and Sally Drinkward Leadership Chair,  Department of Mechanical and Civil Engineering; Executive Officer for Me -chanical and Civil Engineering B.S., Florida Institute of Technolo -gy, 2001; M.S., Stanford University,  2003; PhD, 2006. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2010; Associate Professor,  2010-13; Professor, 2013-17; Housner  Professor, 2017-; Drinkward Leader -ship Chair, Department of Mechanical  and Civil Engineering, 2017-; Executive Officer, 2016-. Ioannis (Yannis) Angelopoulos  Sherman Fairchild Instructor in Math -ematics B.S., University of Athens, 2008; M.S., New York University, 2010; Ph.D.,  University of Toronto, 2015. Caltech  2019-22.Fred C Anson, Ph.D.,D.h.c.  Elizabeth W. Gilloon Professor of  Chemistry, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1954; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 1957; D.h.c., University of  Paris VII, 1993. Instructor, Caltech,  1957-58; Assistant Professor, 1958- 62; Associate Professor, 1962-68;  Professor, 1968-95; Gilloon Professor,  1995-2001; Gilloon Professor Emeritus  2001-. Executive Officer for Chem -istry, 1973-77; Chairman, Division of  Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 1984-94.789Historical SketchuJet Propulsion Laboratory 790Trustees, Administration, Faculty>Alexei Aravin, Ph.D. Professor of Biology  B.S., University of Moscow, 1997;  M.Sc., 1998; Ph.D., 2002. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2009-16; Professor,  2016-.Gloria Arjona Lecturer in Spanish, B.A.  California State University, 1993; M.A.,  University of Southern California, 1997;  Ph.D., 2002. Caltech, 2000-.Frances H Arnold, Nobel Laureate,  Ph.D., D.h.c. Linus Pauling Professor of Chemical  Engineering, Bioengineering and Biochemistry; Director, Donna and  Benjamin M. Rosen Bioengineering Center B.S., Princeton University, 1979;  Ph.D., University of California, 1985;  D.h.c., Stockholm University. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 1986; Assistant Professor, 1987-92; Associate Pro -fessor, 1992-96; Professor, 1996-99;  Professor of Chemical Engineering and  Biochemistry, 1999-2000. Dickinson  Professor, 2000-17; Pauling Professor,  2017-; Director, Rosen Bioengineering  Center, 2013-. Daniel T Arthur Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering M. Eng., Cardiff University, 2007;  Ph.D., Curtin University, 2014. Caltech,  2017-22.Michael Aschbacher, Ph.D.  Shaler Arthur Hanisch Professor of  Mathematics, Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1966; Ph.D., University of Wisconsin, 1969. Bateman Research  Instructor, Caltech, 1970-72; Assistant  Professor, 1972-74; Associate Pro -fessor, 1974-76; Professor, 1976- 96; Hanisch Professor, 1996-2013;  Hanisch Professor, Emeritus, 2013-;  Executive Officer for Mathematics,  1991-94.Domniki Asimaki, Ph.D. Professor of Mechanical and Civil  Engineering Dipl., National Technical University of  Athens, 1998; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000; Ph.D.,  2004. Caltech, 2014-.Paul D Asimow, Ph.D.  Eleanor and John R. McMillan Profes -sor of Geology and Geochemistry A.B., Harvard University, 1991; M.S.,  Caltech, 1993; Ph.D., 1997. Assistant Professor, 1999-2005; Associate Pro -fessor, 2005-2010; Professor, 2010-;  McMillan Professor, 2016-. Harry A. Atwater Otis Booth Leadership Chair, Division  of Engineering and Applied Science; Howard Hughes Professor of Applied  Physics and Materials Science; Direc -tor, Liquid Sunlight Alliance  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1982; M.S., 1983; Ph.D.,  1987. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1988-94; Associate Professor, 1994- 99; Professor of Applied Physics and  Materials Science, 1999-2002; Howard  Hughes Professor, 2002-. Director of  Resnick Sustainability Institute, 2009-15; Director of Joint Center for Artificial  Photosynthesis, 2014-21; Booth Lead-ership Chair, 2021-; Director, Liquid  Sunlight Alliance, 2021-.Joanna M Austin, Ph.D. Professor of Aerospace  B.E., University of Queensland, 1996; B.S., 1996; M.S., California Institute  of Technology, 1998; Ph.D., 2003.  Caltech, 2014-.Jean-Philippe Avouac, Ph.D.  Earle C. Anthony Professor of Geology  and Mechanical and Civil Engineering M.E., Ecole Polytechnique, 1987; Ph.D., Institut de Physique du Globe, 1991; Habil., 1992. Professor, Caltech,  2003-11; Earle C. Anthony Professor,  2012-; Director, Tectonic Observatory,  2004-13.Hyun Ji (Jane) Bae, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Aerospace  B.S., Caltech, 2011; Ph.D., Stanford  University, 2018.  Caltech, 2021- John D Baldeschwieler, Ph.D.  J. Stanley Johnson Professor and  Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus  B.Chem.E., Cornell University, 1956;  Ph.D., University of California, 1959.  Professor, Caltech, 1973-96; Johnson  Professor and Professor of Chemis -try, 1996-99; Johnson Professor and  Professor Emeritus, 1999-. Chairman,  Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 1973-78.David Baltimore, Nobel Laureate,  Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.Phil.h.c. President Emeritus; Distinguished  Professor of Biology   B.A., Swarthmore College, 1960;  Ph.D., Rockefeller University, 1964;  D.Sc.h.c., Swarthmore College; Mount  Trustees, Administration, Faculty 791791Historical Sketch<Holyoke College; Mount Sinai Medical Center; Bard College; University of  Helsinki; Cold Spring Harbor Labora-tory; University of Alabama; California  Polytechnic State University; Columbia University; Yale University; Rocke -feller University; Harvard University;  D.Phil.h.c., Weizmann Institute of Sci -ence. Professor, Caltech, 1997-2006;  Millikan Professor, 2006-2021; Distin -guished Professor, 2021-; President,  1997-2006; President Emeritus, 2006-. Barry C Barish, Nobel Laureate,  Ph.D., Laurea h.c.  Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of  Physics, Emeritus B.A., University of California, 1957;  Ph.D., 1962; Laurea, h.c., University  of Bologna. Research Fellow, Caltech,  1963-66; Assistant Professor, 1966- 69; Associate Professor, 1969-72;  Professor, 1972-91; Linde Professor,  1991-2005; Linde Professor Emeritus,  2005-. Principal Investigator of LIGO, 1994-97; Director, LIGO, 1997-2006. Alan H (Al) Barr, Ph.D.  Professor of Computer Science  B.S., Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 1973; M.S., 1976; Ph.D., 1983. Research Fellow, Caltech, 1984; As -sistant Professor, 1984-90; Associate  Professor, 1990-98; Professor, 1998-;  Executive Officer for Computer Sci -ence, 2000-01.James G Bartlett Visiting Associate in Physics  Ph.D., University of California, Berke -ley, 1992. Caltech, 2017-22. Jacqueline K Barton, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.L.h.c. John G. Kirkwood and Arthur A. Noyes Professor of Chemistry  A.B., Barnard College, 1974; Ph.D.,  Columbia University, 1978; D.Sc.h.c.,  New Jersey Institute; Kenyon College; Yale University; Hamilton College;   Williams College; Lawrence Univer -sity; Columbia University; D.L.h.c., Skidmore College. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 1989; Professor, 1989-97;  Hanisch Professor, 1997-17; Kirk -wood-Noyes Professor, 2017-; Division  Chair, 2009-19; Davidson Leadership  Chair, 2016-19. Konstantin Batygin, Ph.D. Professor of Planetary Science  B.S., UC Santa Cruz, 2008; M.S., California Institute of Technology,  2010; Ph.D., 2012. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2014-19; Van Nuys Page  Scholar, 2017-19, Professor, 2019-. Jesse L (Jack) Beauchamp, Ph.D. Mary and Charles Ferkel Professor of  Chemistry B.S., Caltech, 1964; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 1967. Noyes Research  Instructor, Caltech, 1967-69; Assistant  Professor, 1969-71; Associate Profes -sor, 1971-74; Professor, 1974-2000;  Ferkel Professor, 2000-. James L (Jim) Beck, Ph.D. George W. Housner Professor of Engi -neering and Applied Science, Emeritus B.Sc., University of Auckland, 1969; M.Sc., 1970; Ph.D., Caltech, 1979. Assistant Professor of Civil Engineer -ing, 1981-87; Associate Professor,  1987-96; Professor, 1996-2011;  Housner Professor, 2012-17; Housner  Professor, Emeritus, 2017-; Executive  Officer for Applied Mechanics and Civil  Engineering, 1993-98.Charles Beichman Senior Faculty Associate in Astronomy  A.B., Harvard College, 1973, M.S.,  University of Hawaii, 1975, M.S., 1976; Ph.D., 1979. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 1991-99; 2003-05; 2015-16. Caltech, Senior Faculty Associate, 2005-12; 2015-2016; 2018-23.Josette Bellan Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., Lycee Jules Ferry, 1964; M.S.,  University of Sciences (Paris), 1969; M.S., Princeton University, 1972;  Ph.D., 1974. Senior Research Scientist,  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 1997-.  Lecturer in Jet Propulsion, Caltech,  1992-93; Visiting Associate in Aeronau -tics, 1995-2006; Visiting Associate  in Mechanical and Civil Engineering, 2006-23.Paul M Bellan, Ph.D. Professor of Applied Physics  B.Sc., University of Manitoba, 1970; M.A., Princeton University, 1972; Ph.D.,  1976. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1977-83; Associate Professor, 1983- 89; Professor, 1990-. John E Bercaw, Ph.D.  Centennial Professor of Chemistry,  Emeritus B.S., North Carolina State University,  1967; Ph.D., University of Michigan, 1971. Arthur Amos Noyes Research  Fellow, Caltech, 1972-74; Assistant  Professor, 1974-77; Associate Profes -Officers and Faculty 792Trustees, Administration, Faculty@sor, 1977-79; Professor, 1979-93; Shell  Distinguished Professor, 1985-90; Cen -tennial Professor, 1993-15; Centennial  Professor, Emeritus, 2015-. Executive  Officer for Chemistry, 1999-2002. Marco Bernardi, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied Physics and  Materials Science B.S., University of Rome La Sapienza, 2004; M.S., University of Rome Tor  Vergata, 2008; Ph.D., Massachusetts  Institute of Technology, 2013. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2015-21; Professor,  2021-.Harsha S Bhat Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., Mangalore University, 2001; M.S.,  Harvard University, 2002; Ph.D., 2007.   Caltech, 2011-14; 2019-21.Kaushik Bhattacharya, Ph.D. Howell N. Tyson, Sr., Professor of  Mechanics and Materials Science; Vice  Provost  B.Tech., Indian Institute of Technology,  1986; Ph.D., University of Minnesota, 1991. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1993-99; Associate Professor, 1999- 2000; Professor, 2000-10; Tyson, Sr.,  Professor, 2010-; Executive Officer,  2007-16; Vice Provost, 2016-. Kathryn Bikle Lecturer in Chemistry  B.A., University of California (Santa  Cruz), 1981; M.A., University of Cal-ifornia, 1984. Lecturer in Chemistry,  Caltech, 2000-17; Lecturer in Geology,  2000-14; 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018; 2019; 2020; 2021.Pamela J Bjorkman, Ph.D. David Baltimore Professor of Biology  and Bioengineering; Merkin Institute Professor; Executive Officer for Biology  and Biological Engineering B.A., University of Oregon, 1978;  Ph.D., Harvard University, 1984.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1989-95;  Associate Professor, 1995-98; Profes -sor, 1998-2004; Delbruck Professor,  2004-15; Centennial Professor, 2015- 18; Baltimore Professor, 2018-; HHMI  Investigator, 1989-2015; Executive  Officer, 2000-06, 2020-.   Professor of Cosmochemistry and  Planetary Sciences and Professor of  Chemistry B.S., Duke University, 1981; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1986. Assistant Professor of  Cosmochemistry, 1987-93; Associate  Professor of Cosmochemistry and  Planetary Sciences, 1993-97; Profes -sor, 1997-99; Professor of Cosmo -chemistry and Planetary Sciences and Professor of Chemistry, 1999-. Deputy  Director, Owens Valley Radio Obser -vatory, 2000-06; Master of Student  Houses, 2009-14.Adam Blank Teaching Assistant Professor of Com -puting and Mathematical Sciences B.S., Carnegie Mellon University, 2012;  M.S., 2014.  Lecturer in Computing  and Mathematical Sciences, 2018-2020; Teaching Assistant Professor of  Computing and Mathematical Scienc-es, 2020-.Guillaume Blanquart, Ph.D. Professor of Mechanical Engineering  B.S., M.S., Ecole Polytechnique, 2002; M.S., Stanford University, 2004; Ph.D.,  2008; Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2009-15; Professor, 2015-. Henry Blauvelt Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., Cornell University, 1978; Ph.D.,  California Institute of Technology, 1983.  Caltech, 2020-23.James J (Jamie) Bock, Ph.D. Professor of Physics; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Senior Research Scientist  B.S., Duke University, 1987; M.A.,  University of California, Berkeley, 1990;  Ph.D., 1994. Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Research Scientist, 1994-2012; Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 1994-2008; Senior Faculty Associate, 2008-12; Professor,  2012-; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Senior Research Scientist, 2012-. Justin S Bois Teaching Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.S., University of Illinois (Urba-na-Champaign), 1999; Ph.D., Caltech, 2007. Caltech, 2014-.Simona Bordoni, Ph.D.  Professor of Environmental Science  and Engineering Dipl., University of Rome Tor Vergata,  1996; M.S., University of California  (Los Angeles), 2003; Ph.D., 2007. Moore Postdoctoral Fellow, Caltech,  2007; Assistant Professor, 2009-17;  Professor, 2017-. Katherine L (Katie) Bouman, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences, Electrical En-gineering and Astronomy; Rosenberg  Trustees, Administration, Faculty 793Historical Sketch>Scholar; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute  B.S., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,  2011; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2013; Ph.D., 2017; Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2018-19; Assistant Professor, 2019-; Rosenberg Scholar,  2019-; HMRI Investigator, 2021-. Charles M (Matt) Bradford  Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., Stanford University, 1994; Ph.D.,  Cornell University, 2001. Research  Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,  2003-. Caltech, 2004-23.John F Brady, Ph.D.  Chevron Professor of Chemical Engi -neering and Mechanical Engineering B.S., University of Pennsylvania, 1975; M.S., Stanford University, 1977; Ph.D.,  1981. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1985-89; Professor, 1990-99; Chevron  Professor, 1999-; Professor of Me -chanical Engineering, 2005-. Executive Officer for Chemical Engineering,  1993-99; 2013-19.Fernando Brandao, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Theoretical Physics  B.Sc., Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 2004; M.Sc., 2005; Ph.D. Imperial College London, 2008. Bren  Professor, Caltech, 2016-. Robert D (Bobby) Braun, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Aerospace  B.S., Pennsylvania State University,  1987; M.S., George Washington Uni -versity, 1989; Ph.D., Stanford Universi -ty, 1996. Moore Distinguished Scholar,  Caltech, 2015; Professor, 2020-21;  Bren Professor, 2021-. Amy J Braverman Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.A., Swarthmore College, 1982; M.A.,  University of California Los Angeles,  1992; Ph.D., 1999. Caltech, 2018-21.James B (Jim) Breckinridge  Visiting Associate in Astronomy  B.Sc., Case Institute of Technology,  1961; M.Sc., University of Arizona, 1970; Ph.D., 1976. Lecturer in Applied  Physics, Caltech, 1982; 1984-1991; 1993-96; 1998; Lecturer in Aeronau -tics, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2012, 2014, 201; Lecturer in Aerospace, 2018;  Visiting Associate, 2009-2020. Christopher E Brennen, D.Phil.  Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineering,  Emeritus B.A., University of Oxford, 1963;  M.A., D.Phil., 1966. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1969-72; Senior Research  Fellow, 1972-75; Research Associ -ate, 1975-76; Associate Professor,  1976-82; Professor, 1982-2005;  Hayman Professor, 2005-10; Hayman  Professor, Emeritus, 2010-. Master of  Student Houses, 1983-87; Dean of Students, 1988-92; Executive Officer  for Mechanical Engineering, 1993-97; Vice President for Student Affairs,  1997-2002.John Brewer, Ph.D.  Eli and Edythe Broad Professor of  History and Literature, Emeritus  B.A., University of Cambridge, 1968; M.A., 1972; Ph.D., 1973; M.A. Honor-ary Degree, Harvard University. Moore  Distinguished Scholar, Caltech, 2001;  Professor, 2002-; Broad Professor,  2003-16; Broad Professor, Emeritus,  2017-.William B Bridges, Ph.D. Carl F Braun Professor of Engineering,  Emeritus B.S., University of California, 1956;  M.S., 1957; Ph.D., 1962. Sherman Fair-child Distinguished Scholar, Caltech,  1974-75; Professor of Electrical Engi -neering and Applied Physics, 1977-83; Braun Professor, 1983-2002; Braun  Professor Emeritus, 2002-. Executive  Officer for Electrical Engineering,  1978-81.Alaina A Brinley Visiting Associate in Electrical  Engineering B.A., Kalamazoo College, 2007; Ph.D., University of Texas Southwestern Med -ical Center, 2012; M.D., 2016; Caltech,  2016-21.Charles J Brokaw, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1955; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 1958. Visiting Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1960; Assistant  Professor, 1961-63; Associate Profes -sor, 1963-68; Professor, 1968-2000;  Professor Emeritus, 2000-. Executive  Officer for Biology, 1976-80; 1985-89;  Associate Chairman of the Division of Biology, 1980-85. Marianne Bronner, Ph.D.  Distinguished Professor of Biology;  Director of the Beckman Institute  Sc.B., Brown University, 1975; Ph.D.,  Johns Hopkins University, 1979. Pro -fessor, Caltech, 1996-2000; Ruddock  Professor, 2000-21; Distinguished  793Officers and Faculty 794Trustees, Administration, FacultyProfessor, 2021-; Executive Officer,  2013-16; Director, 2019-. Norman H Brooks, Ph.D.  James Irvine Professor of Environmen -tal and Civil Engineering, Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1949; M.S.,  Harvard University, 1950; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1954. Instructor in Civil Engineering, 1953-54; Assistant Professor, 1954-58; Associate Pro -fessor, 1958-62; Professor, 1962-70;  Professor of Environmental Science  and Civil Engineering, 1970-76; Irvine Professor of Environmental Engineer -ing Science, 1976-77; Irvine Professor  of Environmental Engineering and Civil  Engineering 1977-95; Irvine Professor  Emeritus, 1995-. Academic Officer for  Environmental Engineering Science,  1972-74; Director, Environmental  Quality Laboratory, 1974-93; Executive  Officer for Environmental Engineering  Science, 1985-93.Michael E (Mike) Brown, Ph.D.  Richard and Barbara Rosenberg Pro -fessor of Planetary Astronomy; Terence  D. Barr Leadership Chair, Center for  Comparative Planetary Evolution; Di-rector, Caltech Center for Comparative  Planetary Evolution A.B., Princeton University, 1987; M.A.,  University of California, 1990; Ph.D.,  1994. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  1995; Assistant Professor, 1997-2002;  Associate Professor, 2002-04; Profes -sor, 2005-2008; Rosenberg Professor,  2008-; Barr Leadership Chair, 2021-,  Director, 2020-. Warren C Brown, Ph.D.  Professor of History  B.S., Tufts University, 1985; M.A.,  University of Cincinnati, 1993; Ph.D., University of California (Los Angeles),  1997. Assistant Professor, Caltech  1997-2003; Associate Professor, 2003- 10; Professor, 2010-. Jehoshua (Shuki) Bruck, Ph.D. Gordon and Betty Moore Professor of  Computation and Neural Systems and Electrical Engineering B.Sc., Technion-Israel Institute of  Technology, 1982; M.Sc., 1985; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 1989. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1994-98; Professor,  1998-2001; Moore Professor, 2001-.  Director, Information Science and  Technology, 2003-05. Oscar P Bruno, Ph.D. Professor of Applied and Computation -al Mathematics Lic., University of Buenos Aires, 1982;  Ph.D., New York University (Courant  Institute of Mathematical Sciences), 1989. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1995-98; Professor, 1998-. Execu -tive Officer for Applied Mathematics,  1998-2000.Bingni Brunton, Ph.D. Moore Distinguished Scholar in Biology  and Biological Engineering B.S., Caltech, 2006; Ph.D., Princeton University, 2012. Caltech, 2021-22. Steven L Brunton, Ph.D. Moore Distinguished Scholar  B.S., Caltech, 2006; Ph.D., Princeton University, 2012. Caltech, 2021-22. Claire E Bucholz, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Geology  B.S., Yale University, 2009; Ph. D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2016; Caltech, 2017-.Jed Z Buchwald, Ph.D. Doris and Henry Dreyfuss Professor of  History B.A., Princeton University, 1971; M.A.,  Harvard University, 1973; Ph.D., 1974.  Caltech, 2001-.Joel W Burdick, Ph.D.  Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineering  and Bioengineering; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Research Scientist  B.S., Duke University, 1981; M.S.,  Stanford University, 1982; Ph.D., 1988.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1988- 94; Associate Professor, 1994-2000;  Professor of Mechanical Engineering,  2000-02; Professor of Mechanical En -gineering and Bioengineering, 2002-12;  Executive Officer for Bioengineering,  2006-07; Hayman Professor, 2012-;  Jet Propulsion Laboratory Research  Scientist, 2014-.Erin Burkett Lecturer in Engineering  B.S., University of Delaware, 2004;  Ph.D., University of California, Davis,  2010. Caltech, 2018; 2019; 2020, 2021. Donald S Burnett, Ph.D.  Professor of Nuclear Geochemistry,  Emeritus B.S., University of Chicago, 1959; Ph.D., University of California, 1963.  Research Fellow in Physics, Caltech,  1963-65; Assistant Professor of Nucle -ar Geochemistry, 1965-68; Associate  Trustees, Administration, Faculty 795Historical Sketch@Professor, 1968-75; Professor, 1975- 2006; Professor Emeritus, 2006-. Ac -ademic Officer, Division of Geological  and Planetary Sciences, 1979-87.Ashay Burungale Scott Russell Johnson Instructor in Mathematics B.A., Indian Statistical Institute, Banga-lore Centre, 2009; Ph.D., University of  California Los Angeles, 2015. Caltech  2018-21.Gentian Buzi Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., SUNY College; M.S., Caltech, 2002; Ph.D., 2009. Lecturer; 2009-11.  Caltech; 2019-21.Long Cai, Ph.D. Professor of Biology and Biological  Engineering B.A, Harvard University, 2001; Ph.D.,  2006. Visiting Associate 2017-18;  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2010-17;  Research Professor, 2017-2018; Pro -fessor, 2018-. Joern Callies, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Environmental  Science and Engineering M.S., University of Hamburg, Germany,  2011; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2015. Caltech, 2017-. Colin F Camerer, Ph.D.  Robert Kirby Professor of Behavioral  Economics; T&C Chen Center for So-cial and Decision Neuroscience Lead -ership Chair; Director T&C Chen Center  for Social and Decision Neuroscience  B.A., Johns Hopkins University,  1976; M.B.A., University of Chicago, 1979; Ph.D., 1981. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 1993; Rea A. and Lela G. Ax-line Professor of Business Economics,  1994-2008; Kirby Professor of Behav -ioral Finance and Economics, 2008; Kirby Professor, 2008-;Chen Center  for Social and Decision Neuroscience  Leadership Chair, 2017-; Executive  Officer, 2017-19; Director, Chen Center  for Social and Decision Neuroscience,  2017- .Robert A (Andy) Cameron  Senior Research Associate in Biology,  Emeritus B.A., San Jose State College, 1968; Ph.D., University of California (Santa  Cruz), 1975. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 1984-85; Senior Research  Fellow, 1985-89; Senior Research As -sociate, 1989-2015; Senior Research  Associate, Emeritus, 2015-.Stefano Campagnola Lecturer in Aerospace  M.S., Politecnico Di Milano, 2002; Ph.D., University of Southern Califor -nia, 2010. Caltech, 2018; 2019; 2020.Christopher J (Justin) Campbell Harry Bateman Instructor in Mathe-matics B.S., University of Michigan, 2012; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2018.  Caltech 2018-21.Judith L Campbell, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry and Biology  B.A., Wellesley College, 1965; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1974. Assistant  Professor of Chemistry, Caltech, 1977- 83; Associate Professor, 1983-85;  Associate Professor of Chemistry and  Biology, 1985-89; Professor, 1989-. Sean M Carroll  Research Professor of Physics  B.S., Villanova University, 1988; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1993. Caltech,  2006-.Juan Ceva Lecturer in Humanities  B.S., St. Louis University, 1991; M.S.,  Stanford University, 1992; Ph.D., 1995.   Caltech, 2019; 2020; 2021.Jean-Lou A Chameau, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. President Emeritus  Ing., Ecole Nationale Superieure D'Arts  et Metiers, 1976; M.S., Stanford Uni -versity, 1977; Ph.D., 1981; D.Sc.h.c.,  Occidental College. Professor of Civil  Engineering, Environmental Science  and Engineering, and Mechanical Engi-neering, 2006-13; Davidow Presidential  Professor, 2013; President, 2006-13;  President Emeritus, 2013-. David C Chan, Ph.D. Professor of Biology; Dean of Graduate  Studies A.B., Harvard College, 1988; M.D.,  Harvard Medical School, 1996; Ph.D.,  1996. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2000-06; Bren Scholar, 2000-06; As -sociate Professor, 2006-10; Professor,  2010-; Dean, 2020-; HHMI Investigator,  2008-14.Garnet K Chan, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Chemistry  B.A., University of Cambridge, 1996; M.A., 2000; Ph.D., 2000. Moore Distin -795Officers and Faculty 796796Trustees, Administration, FacultyDguished Scholar, Caltech, 2014, 2015;  Bren Professor, 2016-. Sunney I Chan, Ph.D. George Grant Hoag Professor of Bio -physical Chemistry, Emeritus  B.S., University of California, 1957;  Ph.D., 1961. Assistant Professor of  Chemical Physics, Caltech, 1963-64; Associate Professor, 1964-68; Profes -sor, 1968-76; Professor of Chemical  Physics and Biophysical Chemistry,  1976-92; Hoag Professor, 1992-2001;  Hoag Professor Emeritus, 2002-.  Acting Executive Officer for Chemistry,  1977-78; Executive Officer, 1978-80;  1989-94; Master of Student Houses, 1980-83.Venkat Chandrasekaran, Ph.D.  Professor of Computing and Math -ematical Sciences and Electrical Engineering B.A., Rice University, 2005; B.S., 2005;  M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2007; Ph.D., 2011. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2012-17; Professor,  2017-.Kanianthra M (Mani) Chandy, Ph.D.  Simon Ramo Professor of Computer  Science, Emeritus B.Tech., Indian Institute of Technology,  1965; M.S., Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, 1966; Ph.D., Massachusetts  Institute of Technology, 1969. Sherman  Fairchild Distinguished Scholar,  Caltech, 1988; Visiting Professor,  1988-89; Professor, 1989-97; Ramo  Professor, 1997-2014; Ramo Professor,  Emeritus, 2014-. Executive Officer for  Computer Science, 1997-2000; Deputy Chair, 2009-12. Katerina Chatziioannou, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Physics; William  H. Hurt Scholar B.S., University of Athens, 2010; M.S., Montana State University, 2013; Ph.D,  2016. Caltech, 2020-; Hurt Scholar,  2021-.Lei Chen Noether Instructor in Mathematics, B.S., Peking University, 2013; M.S.,  University of Chicago, 2015; Ph.D., University of Chicago, 2018. Caltech 2018-21.Xie Chen, Ph.D. Professor of Theoretical Physics  B.S., Tsinghua University China, 2006;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2014-17; Associate Professor,  2017-19; Professor, 2019-. Yanbei Chen, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics  B.S., Peking University, 1999; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 2003. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2005-07; Assistant Professor,  2007-10; Associate Professor, 2010- 13; Professor, 2013-. Wan Cheng  Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., University of Science and Tech -nology of China, 2006; Ph.D., 2011. Caltech, 2016-20.  Professor of Theoretical Physics  B.S., Yale University, 2004; M.A.,  Harvard University, 2006; Ph.D., 2009.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2012-19;  Professor, 2019-. Anne Chomyn Senior Research Associate in Biology,  Emeritus B.S., Drexel University, 1972; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1978. Research Fellow,  1978-82; Senior Research Fellow,  1982-87; Senior Research Associate,  1989-2007; Senior Research Associate  Emeritus, 2007-; Lecturer in Biology,  2007.Shasha Chong, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Chemistry;  Ronald and JoAnne Willens Scholar B.S., University of Science and Tech -nology of China, 2008; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 2014. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2020-21; Assistant Professor,  2021-; Willens Scholar, 2021-. Tsui-Fen Chou  Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.S., National Taiwan University, 1999;  Ph.D., University of Minnesota, 2006.  Caltech, 2018-.Vasileios N Christopoulos  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Technical University of Crete,  2003; M.S., University of Minnesota, 2005; Ph.D., 2010.  Caltech, 2019-22.Jason Chu Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering BSc.H., Queen's University, 2004;  M.Sc., University of Toronto, 2006;  M.D., Saint Louis University, 2010.   Caltech, 2020-21.Trustees, Administration, Faculty 797Soon Jo Chung, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Aerospace and  Control and Dynamical Systems;  Jet Propulsion Laboratory Research  Scientist B.S., Korea Advanced Institute of  Science and Technology, 1998; S.M.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technol -ogy, 2002; Sc.D., 2007. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 2016-18; Professor,  2018-19; Bren Scholar, 2016-19; Bren  Professor, 2019-; Jet Propulsion Labo -ratory Research Scientist, 2016-. Ibrahim I Cisse, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.S., North Carolina Central Univer -sity, Durham, 2004; M.S., University  of Illinois Urbana, 2005; Ph.D., 2009. Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2020;  Professor, 2021-. Robert W Clayton, Ph.D. Professor of Geophysics  B.A.Sc., University of Toronto, 1973;  M.Sc., University of British Columbia, 1976; Ph.D., Stanford University, 1981.  Assistant Professor of Exploration  Geophysics, Caltech, 1981-85; Asso-ciate Professor, 1985-89; Professor of  Geophysics, 1989-. Executive Officer  for Geophysics, 1987-94; Acting Di-rector, Seismological Laboratory, 1989;  2008-09; Deputy Director, 1989-90;  Academic Officer, 2008-19. William M (Bil) Clemons Ph.D. Arthur and Marian Hanisch Memorial Professor of Biochemistry  B.S., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and  State University, 1995; Ph.D., Universi -ty of Utah, 2000. Assistant Professor of  Chemistry, Caltech, 2005-07; Assistant  Professor of Biochemistry, 2007-13;  Professor, 2013-21; Hanisch Professor,  2021-.Elizabeth S Cochran Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.S., University of California, Santa  Barbara, 2000; M.S., University of California, Los Angeles, 2003; Ph.D.,  2005. Caltech, 2011-23.Judith G Cohen, Ph.D. Kate Van Nuys Page Professor of  Astronomy, Emeritus  B.A., Radcliffe College, 1967; M.S.,  Caltech, 1969; Ph.D., 1971; B.S., University of Arizona, 1978. Associate Professor, Caltech, 1979-88; Professor,  1988-2005; Page Professor, 2005-18;  Page Professor, Emeritus, 2018-. Exec -utive Officer for Astronomy, 1995-96. Marshall H Cohen, Ph.D. Professor of Astronomy, Emeritus  B.E.E., Ohio State University, 1948;  M.S., 1949; Ph.D., 1952. Visiting  Associate Professor, Caltech, 1965;  Professor of Radio Astronomy, 1968- 90; Professor of Astronomy, 1990-95;  Professor Emeritus, 1995-. Executive  Officer for Astronomy, 1981-85. Andres Collazo  Lecturer in Biology and Biological  Engineering B.S., Cornell University, 1985; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1990. Scientist  II, Section Chief, House Ear Institute, 2000-.  Research Fellow, Caltech,  1991-94; Senior Research Fellow,  1994-96; Visiting Associate, 2005-10;  Lecturer, 2015-20. Tim Colonius, Ph.D. Frank and Ora Lee Marble Professor of  Mechanical Engineering B.S., University of Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1987; M.S., Stanford University,  1988; Ph.D., 1994. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1994-2000; Associate Pro -fessor, 2000-05; Professor, 2005-16;  Marble Professor, 2017-. David Conlon, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  B.A., University of Dublin Trinity  College, 2003; M.A., University of Cambridge, 2006; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 2009; Moore Distinguished  Scholar, Caltech, 2018; Professor,  2019-.Robert D (Dale) Conner Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., California State Polytechnic  University, 1989; M.S., Caltech, 1994;  Ph.D., 1998. Assistant Professor,  California State University (Northridge),  2006-. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2001-02; Lecturer, 2002-04; Senior  Research Fellow, 2003-06; Visiting  Associate, 2006-21.Erik M Conway Visiting Associate in the Humanities  Ph.D., University of Minnesota, Twin  Cities.  Caltech, 2019-21.Matthew M Cook, Ph.D. Moore Distinguished Scholar  Ph.D., Caltech, 2005. Visiting Associ -ate, Caltech, 2006-11; Moore Distin -guished Scholar, 2021-22. Asantha Cooray Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of 797Historical SketchB797Officers and Faculty 798Trustees, Administration, Faculty–Technology, 1997; M.S., 1997; M.S.,  University of Chicago, 1998; Ph.D., 2001. Assistant Professor, University of  California (Irvine), 2005-. Sherman Fair -child Senior Research Fellow, Caltech,  2001-05; Visiting Associate, 2005-21. Roman A Corfas Lecturer in Biology and Biological  Engineering B.A., Oberlin College, 2008; Ph.D., Rockefeller University, 2016.  Caltech,  2021.Noel Corngold, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied Physics, Emeritus  A.B., Columbia College, 1949; A.M., Harvard University, 1950; Ph.D., 1954.  Professor of Applied Science, Caltech,  1966-74; Professor of Applied Physics,  1974-2002; Professor Emeritus, 2002-. Abigail T Crites Visiting Associate in Physics  Ph.D., University of Chicago, 2013. Caltech 20-22.Michael C Cross, Ph.D.  Professor of Theoretical Physics,  Emeritus B.A., University of Cambridge, 1972; Ph.D., 1975. Professor, Caltech, 1984- 2016; Professor Emeritus, 2016-. Fred E Culick, Ph.D.  Richard L. and Dorothy M. Hayman  Professor of Mechanical Engineer -ing and Professor of Jet Propulsion,  Emeritus S.B., S.M., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1957; Ph.D., 1961.  Research Fellow in Jet Propulsion,  Caltech, 1961-63; Assistant Professor,  1963-66; Associate Professor, 1966- 71; Professor, 1971-78; Professor of  Applied Physics and Jet Propulsion,  1978-88; Professor of Mechanical  Engineering and Jet Propulsion,  1988-1997; Hayman Professor, 1997- 2004; Professor of Jet Propulsion,  1997-2004; Hayman Professor and  Professor, Emeritus, 2004-. Scott K Cushing, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Chemistry  B.S., West Virginia University, Mor -gantown, 2011; Ph.D., 2015; Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2018; Assistant Professor, 2018-. Curt J Cutler Senior Faculty Associate in Physics B.S., Yale University, 1983; Ph.D.,  1989. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  1999-2006; Senior Faculty Associate, 2006-.Jaksa Cvitanic, Ph.D. Richard N. Merkin Professor of Mathe -matical Finance; Director, Ronald and  Maxine Linde Institute of Economic and Management Sciences B.A., University of Zagreb (Croatia),  1985; M.S., 1988; M.Phil., Colum-bia University, 1991; Ph.D., 1992.  Professor, Caltech, 2005-13; Merkin  Professor, 2013-; Associate Director,  Ronald and Maxine Linde Institute of Economic and Management Sciences, 2015-16; Director, Ronald and Maxine  Linde Institute of Economic and Man-agement Sciences, 2016-.John O Dabiri, Ph.D. Centennial Professor of Aeronautics  and Mechanical Engineering B.S., Princeton, 2001; M.S., Caltech, 2003; Ph.D., 2005. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2005-09; Associate Professor,  2009-10; Professor, 2010-16; Visiting  Associate, 2019; Centennial Professor,  2019-; Dean of Undergraduate Stu -dents, 2014-16.Christine Daley Lecturer in Writing  B.A., Boston College, 1991; M.A., Loyola Marymount University, 1997;  Ph.D., City University of New York  Graduate School, 2006. Caltech, 2007-21.Chiara Daraio, Ph.D. G. Bradford Jones Professor of  Mechanical Engineering and Applied Physics; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute  B.S.; M.S., University of Ancona (Italy), 2001; M.S., University of California  (San Diego), 2003; Ph.D., 2006. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2006-10;  Professor, 2011-21; Jones Professor,  2021-; HMRI Investigator, 2021-. Siddharth Dasgupta Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.S., IIT Kanpur, 1980; M.S., 2005;  M.B.A., University of California, Los  Angeles, 2002; Ph.D., Princeton Uni-versity, 1985.  Caltech, 2019-24. Mark E Davis, Ph.D. Warren and Katharine Schlinger Profes -sor of Chemical Engineering B.S., University of Kentucky, 1977;  M.S., 1978; Ph.D., 1981. Professor,  Caltech, 1991-93; Schlinger Professor,  1993-. Executive Officer for Chemical  Engineering, 1999-2004.Trustees, Administration, Faculty 799Artur Davoyan Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., Saratov State University, 2007;  M.S., 2007; Ph.D., Australian National University, 2011. Caltech, 2018-20. Katherine R de Kleer, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Planetary Sci -ence and Astronomy  B.Sc., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology (Mathematics & Physics), 2009; M.A., University of California, Berkeley,  2013; Ph.D., 2017. Caltech, 2019-.Richard A Dean, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1945; A.B., Denison University, 1947; M.S., Ohio State  University, 1948; Ph.D., 1953. Harry  Bateman Research Fellow, Caltech,  1954-55; Assistant Professor, 1955-59;  Associate Professor, 1959-66; Pro -fessor, 1966-86; Professor Emeritus,  1987-.John V Decemvirale Weisman Postdoctoral Instructor in  Visual Culture and Caltech Presidential  Postdoctoral Fellow B.A., New York University, 2006; M.A.,  Royal College of Art, 2010; Ph.D, University of California (Santa Barbra),  2021. Caltech, 2021-23.Marios D Demetriou Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of Arizona, 1995; M.S., University of California (Los Angeles),  1997; Ph.D., 2001. Caltech, Research  Professor 2007-2016; Visiting Associ -ate,  2017-21.Semra Demirel-Frank  Visiting Associate in Mathematics  M.Sc., University of Stuttgart, 2007; Ph.D., 2012.  Caltech, 2013-17; 2021.Yesim Demiroglu  Hearst Instructor in Mathematics B.S., Bilkent University, 2012; Ph.D.,  University of Rochester, 2018. Caltech  2020-23.Tracy K Dennison, Ph.D.  Professor of Social Science History  B.A., Bucknell University, 1992; M.Phil.,  University of Oxford, 1999; Ph.D., Uni -versity of Cambridge, 2004. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2006-09; Associate  Professor, 2009-11; Professor, 2011-. Peter B Dervan, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Bren Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus  B.S., Boston College, 1967; Ph.D., Yale  University, 1972; D.Sc.h.c., Boston  College. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1973-79; Associate Professor, 1979- 82; Professor, 1982-88; Bren Professor,  1988-2019; Bren Professor, Emeritus,  2020-; Chair, Division of Chemistry  and Chemical Engineering, 1994-99; Vice President for Development and  Institute Relations, 2011-12.Mathieu Desbrun, Ph.D. Carl F Braun Professor of Computing  and Mathematical Sciences M.Eng., National Engineering School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics (Grenoble), 1994; M.S.,  University of Grenoble, 1994; Ph.D.,  National Polytechnic Institute of Grenoble, 1997. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2000-04; Associate Professor,  2004-09; Professor, 2009-13; Miles  Professor, 2013-16; Braun Professor,  2017-; Director of Information Science  and Technology, 2009-12; Director  of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, 2009-14; Executive Officer  for Computing and Mathematical Sciences, 2014-15.Raymond J (Ray) Deshaies Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Cornell University, 1983; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1988. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1994-99; Asso -ciate Professor, 2000-05; Professor,  2005-17; HHMI Investigator, 2000-17;  Executive Officer, 2006-16; Visiting  Associate 2017-22.Abhishek Dey Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.E., Bengal Engineering and Science University (Shibpur), 2011; M. Tech.;  Indian Institute of Technology (Kharag -pur), 2013; Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology (Delhi), 2019. Caltech,  2021-23.Clive Dickinson Visiting Associate in Astronomy  M.A., University of Manchester, 1999;  Ph.D., 2002.  Caltech, 2018-22.Michael H Dickinson, Ph.D. Esther M. and Abe M. Zarem Professor  of Bioengineering and Aeronautics;  Executive Officer for Biology and Bio -logical Engineering Sc.B., Brown University, 1984; Ph.D.,  University of Washington, 1989.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2001-02;  Professor, 2002-03; Zarem Professor,  2003-; Executive Officer, 2020-. 799Historical SketchEOfficers and Faculty 800Trustees, Administration, FacultyIPaul Dimotakis, Ph.D. John K. Northrop Professor of  Aeronautics and Professor of Applied  Physics B.S., Caltech, 1968; M.S., 1969; Ph.D., 1973. Research Fellow, 1973-74; Re -search Fellow and Lecturer, 1974-75;  Assistant Professor, 1975-81; Asso -ciate Professor, 1981-85; Professor,  1986-95; Northrop Professor, 1995-;  Jet Propulsion Laboratory Chief Tech -nologist, 2006-11.Stanislav G (George) Djorgovski, Ph.D. Professor of Astronomy and Data  Science B.A., University of Belgrade, 1979; M.A., University of California, 1981;  Ph.D., 1985; Assistant Professor,  Caltech 1987-90; Associate Professor,  1990-97; Professor, 1997-; Director,  Center for Data Driven Discovery,  2014-19; Executive Officer for Astrono -my, 2016-19. Olivier P Dore  Senior Faculty Associate in Physics, Ph.D. Institute d'Astrophysique de Paris,  2001. Caltech, 2010-24.Dennis A Dougherty, Ph.D.  George Grant Hoag Professor of  Chemistry; Norman Davidson Leader-ship Chair, Division of Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering B.S., M.S., Bucknell University, 1974;  Ph.D., Princeton University, 1978.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1979- 85; Associate Professor, 1985-89;  Professor, 1989-2001; Hoag Professor,  2002-. Executive Officer for Chemistry,  1994-99; Director, 2018-19; Division  Chair, 2019-; Davidson Leadership  Chair, 2019-. John C Doyle, Ph.D. Jean-Lou Chameau Professor of Con -trol and Dynamical Systems, Electrical  Engineering, and Bioengineering B.S., M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977; Ph.D., University  of California, 1984. Visiting Assistant  Professor of Electrical Engineering,  Caltech, 1985; Visiting Associate  Professor, 1986; Visiting Associate in  Chemistry, 1986-87; Associate Profes -sor of Electrical Engineering, 1987-91; Professor, 1991-2001; Professor of  Control and Dynamical Systems,  Electrical Engineering, and Bioengi-neering, 2002-04; Braun Professor,  2004-08; 2009-13; Jean-Lou Chameau Professor, 2013-. Alexander (Alex) Dunn Olga Taussky and John Todd Instructor  in Mathematics B.A., University of Queensland, 2013; M.A., 2015; Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana, 2020. Caltech 2020-23.William G Dunphy, Ph.D.  Grace C. Steele Professor of Biology  A.B., Harvard College, 1980; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 1985. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1989-95; Associate  Professor, 1995-2001; Professor, 2001- 08; Steele Professor, 2008-. Polona Durcik  Harry Bateman Instructor in Mathe-matics B.S., University of Ljubljana, 2011; M.S., University of Bonn, 2014; Ph.D., 2017.  Caltech, 2017-20.Maura D Dykstra, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of History  B.A., California State University,  Sacramento, 2004; M.A., University of California, Los Angeles, 2008; Ph.D.,  2014. Research Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2015-16; Assistant Professor,  2016-.Frederick D Eberhardt, Ph.D.  Professor of Philosophy  B.S., London School of Economics, 2002; M.S., Carnegie Mellon University,  2005; Ph.D., 2007. Caltech, 2013-.Bertrand Echenard  Research Professor of High Energy  Physics Ph.D., Geneva University, 2005.  Caltech, 2009-.Federico M Echenique, Ph.D. Allen and Lenabelle Davis Professor of  Economics Licenciado, University of the Republic (Uruguay), 1995; Ph.D., University of California, 2000. Instructor, Caltech,  2002-03; Assistant Professor, 2004;  Associate Professor, 2004-10; Profes -sor, 2010-16; Davis Professor, 2016-;  Executive Officer, 2013-16.   George Van Osdol Professor of Electri -cal Engineering; Vice Provost  B.S., Stanford University, 1989; M.S.,  1990; Ph.D., 1994. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1994-2000. Associate Profes -sor, 2000-05; Professor, 2005-13; Van  Osdol Professor, 2013-; Vice Provost,  2021-.Trustees, Administration, Faculty 801Historical SketchGTodd Ehlers, Ph.D.  Moore Distinguished Scholar in  Geology B.A., Calvin College, Grand Rapids, 1993; M.Sc., University of Utah, 1996, 1997; Ph.D, 2001. Caltech 2021-22.Bethany L Ehlmann, Ph.D. Professor of Planetary Science; Asso -ciate Director, Keck Institute for Space  Studies A.B., Washington University in St. Lou -is, 2004; M.Sc., University of Oxford,  2005; M.Sc., 2007; M.S., Brown Uni -versity, 2008; Ph.D., 2010.  Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2011-17; Professor,  2017-; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Research Scientist, 2011-20; Associate  Director, 2018-. John M Eiler, Ph.D.  Robert P. Sharp Professor of Geology  and Geochemistry B.S., University of Iowa, 1989; M.S., University of Wisconsin (Madison), 1991; Ph.D., 1994. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1994-97; Senior Research  Fellow 1997-98; Assistant Professor,  1998-2003; Associate Professor, 2003- 06; Professor, 2006-; Sharp Professor,  2008-.James P (Jim) Eisenstein, Ph.D. Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics  and Applied Physics, Emeritus A.B., Oberlin College, 1974; Ph.D., Uni -versity of California, 1980. Professor of  Physics, Caltech, 1996-2004; Roshek Professor, 2004-05; Roshek Professor  of Physics and Applied Physics, 2005-17; Roshek Professor, Emeritus, 2017-. Joshua T Eisenthal Research Assistant Professor of  Philosophy B.A., Oxford University, 2008; P.G.C.E.,  Canterbury Christ Church University,  2009; Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh,  2018.  Caltech, 2019-.Charles Elachi, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Professor of Electrical Engineering and  Planetary Science, Emeritus B.Sc., University of Grenoble, 1968;  Dipl. Ing., National Polytechnical Insti-tute (Grenoble), 1968; M.S., Caltech,  1969; Ph.D., 1971; M.B.A., University of Southern California, 1978; D.Sc.h.c.,  Occidental College. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1971-73; Lecturer in Electrical  Engineering, 1982-88; Lecturer in  Electrical Engineering and Planetary Science, 1988-2001; Professor, 2002- 16. Vice President and Director, 2001- 16; Professor Emeritus, 2016-. Richard S Ellis  Visiting Associate in Astronomy  B.Sc., University College (London), 1971; D. Phil., University of Oxford,  1974; D.Sc.h.c., University of Durham. Visiting Associate, Caltech, 1997-98;  2015-2016; 2017-23, Professor, 1999- 2002; Steele Professor, 2002-2015.  Deputy Director, Palomar Observatory,  1999-2000; Director,  2000-02; Direc -tor, Caltech Optical Observatories,  2002-05.Michael B Elowitz, Ph.D. Professor of Biology and Bioengi -neering; Investigator, Howard Hughes  Medical Institute B.A., University of California, 1992;  M.A., Ph.D., Princeton University, 1999.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2003-09;  Bren Scholar, 2003-09; Associate  Professor, 2009-10; Professor, 2010-;  HHMI Investigator, 2008-; Executive  Officer, 2013-20. Azita Emami, Ph.D. Andrew and Peggy Cherng Professor  of Electrical Engineering and Medical Engineering; Executive Officer for  Electrical Engineering; Director, Center  for Sensing to Intelligence B.S., Sharif University of Technology,  1996; M.S., Stanford University, 1999;  Ph.D., 2004. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2007-13; Professor, 2013-17;  Cherng Professor, 2017-; HMRI Investi -gator, 2015-21; EAS Division Deputy  Chair, 2015-18; Executive Officer,  2018-; Director, 2021-. Manuel A Endres, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics; Rosenberg  Scholar M.Sc., Johannes Gutenberg-Universi -tät Munich, 2008; Ph.D., Ludwig-Max-imilians-Universität Munich, 2013. Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2015-16;  Assistant Professor, 2016-21; Profes -sor, 2021-; Rosenberg Scholar, 2019-. Hermann Engelhardt  Senior Research Associate in Geo -physics, Emeritus Dipl., Technical University of Munich,  1960; Dr.rer.Nat., 1974. Senior  Research Fellow, Caltech, 1976-79;  Visiting Associate, 1981; Senior Re -search Associate, 1988-2002; Senior  Research Associate Emeritus, 2002-. Jean E Ensminger, Ph.D.  Edie and Lew Wasserman Professor of  Social Sciences B.A., Cornell University, 1974; M.A.,  Northwestern University, 1976;  801Officers and Faculty Ph.D., 1984. Professor of Anthropol -ogy, Caltech, 2000-07; Wasserman  Professor of Anthropology, 2007-09;  Wasserman Professor, 2009-. Chair,  Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, 2002-06.Thomas E (Tom) Everhart, Ph.D.,  D.L.h.c., D.h.c. President Emeritus; Professor of Elec -trical Engineering and Applied Physics, Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1953; M.Sc.,  University of California (Los Angeles),  1955; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 1958; D.L.h.c., Illinois Wesleyan Uni -versity; Pepperdine University; D.h.c.,  Colorado School of Mines. Professor,  Caltech, 1987-99; Professor Emeritus,  1999-. President, 1987-97; President  Emeritus, 1997-.Pamela L Eversole-Cire  Visiting Associate in Biology  B.S. (Biology), B.S. (Chemistry), Uni-versity of California (Irvine), 1982; M.S.,  1985; Ph.D., University of Southern  California, 1994. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1995-98; Senior Research  Fellow, 1998-2001; Visiting Associate,  2008-21.Michael J Ewens, Ph.D. Professor of Finance and Entrepre -neurship B.A., Washington University in St.  Louis, 2004; M.A., University of Cali-fornia, San Diego, 2008;  Ph.D., 2010.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 2014-19;  Professor, 2019-. Maxellende (Max) Ezin Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Spelman College, 1996; Ph.D., University of Virginia, 2002. Caltech,  2009-11; 2021-24.Katherine T Faber, Ph.D.  Simon Ramo Professor of Materials  Science B.S., Alfred University, 1975; M.S., The  Pennsylvania State University, 1978;  Ph.D., University of California, Berke -ley, 1982. Ramo Professor, Caltech,  2014-.Jennifer L Factor Lecturer in Poetry  A.B., Harvard-Radcliffe College, 1991;  M.F.A., Bennington College, 2000;  M.A., Brandeis University, 2018.   Caltech, 2018-21.Joseph L Falson, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Materials Sci -ence; William H. Hurt Scholar B.S., University of New South Wales,  2009; M.S., Tohoku University, 2012;  Ph.D., University of Tokyo, 2015. Visit -ing Associate, Caltech, 2019; Assistant Professor, 2020-; Hurt Scholar, 2021-. Andrei Faraon, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied Physics and  Electrical Engineering B.S., California Institute of Technol -ogy, 2004; M.S., Stanford University,  2009; Ph.D., 2009. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2011-12; Assistant Professor,  2012-18; Professor, 2018-. Kenneth A (Ken) Farley, Ph.D.  W.M. Keck Foundation Professor of  Geochemistry B.S., Yale University, 1986; Ph.D., Uni -versity of California (San Diego), 1991.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1993-96;  Associate Professor, 1997-98; Pro -fessor, 1998-2003; Keck Foundation  Professor, 2003-. Director, Tectonic  Observatory, 2003-04; Division Chair,  2004-14.Mordechai Feingold, Ph.D.  Kate Van Nuys Page Professor of the  History of Science and the Humanities B.A., Hebrew University of Jerusalem,  1972; M.A., 1976; D.Phil., University of Oxford, 1980. Visiting Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1994. Professor,  2002-19; Kate Van Nuys Page Profes -sor, 2019-. Katalin (Kata) Fejes Toth  Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering M.D., Semmelweiss University, 2001;  Ph.D., University of Heidelberg, 2004.  Caltech 2010-.Yejun Feng  Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., Fudan University, 1996, M.S.,  City College of New York, 1999, Ph.D.,  University of Washington, 2003.  Caltech 2015-23.Bradley W Filippone, Ph.D. Francis L. Moseley Professor of  Physics B.S., Pennsylvania State University,  1977; M.S., University of Chicago, 1979; Ph.D., 1982. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1983-84; Assistant Professor,  1984-90; Associate Professor, 1990- 95; Professor, 1995-2016; Moseley  Professor, 2016-. Woodward Fischer, Ph.D., D.h.c.  Professor of Geobiology; Associate  Director, Center for Autonomous Sys -802Trustees, Administration, Faculty,Trustees, Administration, Faculty 803Historical SketchItems and Technologies  B.A., Colorado College, 2000; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2007; D.h.c.,  Colorado College. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2009-14; Professor, 2014-;  Associate Director, 2018-. Matthias Flach, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  Dipl., Johann-Wolfgang von Goethe  University (Frankfurt), 1986; Ph.D., St. John's College, 1991. Associate Professor, Caltech, 1995-99; Professor,  1999-. Executive Officer for Mathemat -ics, 2006-09.Richard C Flagan, Ph.D.  Irma and Ross McCollum-William H. Corcoran Professor of Chemical En -gineering and Environmental Science  and Engineering B.S.E., University of Michigan, 1969; S.M., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1971; Ph.D., 1973. Assistant  Professor of Environmental Engineer -ing Science, Caltech, 1975-81; Asso-ciate Professor, 1981-84; Associate  Professor of Environmental Engi -neering and Mechanical Engineering, 1984-85; Professor, 1986-90; Professor  of Chemical Engineering, 1990-2000;  McCollum Professor of Chemical Engi -neering, 2000-03; McCollum Professor  of Chemical Engineering and Professor  of Environmental Science and Engi -neering, 2003-04; McCollum-Corcoran  Professor of Chemical Engineering and  Environmental Science and Engineer -ing, 2004-. Acting Executive Officer for  Chemical Engineering, 1996; Executive Officer, 1997; 2004-13. Stephen J Forman Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering B.A., St. John's College, 1970; M.D., University of Southern California, 1974.  Staff Physician and Chairman of the  Board of Directors, City of Hope, 2001- . Caltech, 2005-21.Alessandro Fortunelli  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  M.S., University of Pisa, 1983. First Researcher, Instituto per i Processi  Chimico-Fisici, 1984-. Caltech, 2003-04; 2012-21.Abigail Fraeman Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.S., Yale University, 2009; M.A.,  Washington University in St. Louis,  2011; Ph.D., 2014. Caltech, 2016- 23.Anthony T Fragoso Lecturer in Aerospace  B.S., Yale University, 2013; M.S., Cal -ifornia Institute of Technology, 2013;  Ph.D., 2018.  Caltech, 2021.Christian Frankenberg, Ph.D. Professor of Environmental Science  and Engineering; Jet Propulsion Labo -ratory Research Scientist  B.S., University of Bayreuth, 2002;  Ph.D., Ruprecht-Karls-Universitat  Heidelberg, 2005. Associate Professor,  Caltech, 2015-18; Professor, 2018-;  Jet Propulsion Laboratory Research  Scientist, 2015-.Steven C Frautschi, Ph.D. Professor of Theoretical Physics,  Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1954; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 1958. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1962-64; Associate  Professor, 1964-66; Professor, 1966-  2006; Professor Emeritus, 2006-. Exec -utive Officer  for Physics, 1988-97;  Master of Student Houses, 1997-2002.Gregory C Fu, Ph.D.  Norman Chandler Professor of  Chemistry B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1985; Ph.D., Harvard Universi -ty, 1991. Moore Distinguished Scholar,  Caltech, 2011; Altair Professor, 2012- 16; Chandler Professor, 2016-. Xiaojing (Ruby) Fu, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., Clarkson University, 2011; M.S.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2015; Ph.D., 2017. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2019-20; Assistant Professor,  2021-.Megumi Fujio Lecturer in Japanese  B.A., Yamaguchi University, 1996;  M.A., University of Colorado (Boulder), 2004; Ph.D., McGill University, 2017.  Caltech, 2017 - 23.James (Jim) Fuller, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Theoretical  Astrophysics  B.A., Whitman College, 2008; M.S., Cornell University, 2011; Ph.D., 2014.  Visiting Associate, Caltech 2017;  Assistant Professor, 2017-. Brent Fultz, Ph.D.  Barbara and Stanley R. Rawn, Jr.,  Professor of Materials Science and  Applied Physics B.Sc., Massachusetts Institute of 803Officers and Faculty Technology, 1975; M.Sc., University of  California, 1978; Ph.D., 1982. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1985-90; Associate  Professor, 1990-97; Professor of Mate -rials Science, 1997-2002; Professor of  Materials Science and Applied Physics, 2003-13; Rawn Professor, 2013-. Margaret E Gaida  Postdoctoral Instructor in Early Modern  Natural Philosophy B.A., Duke University, 2003; M.A., Uni -versity of California (San Diego), 2007;  Ph.D., University of Oklahoma, 2017. Caltech, 2020-22.Todd C Gaier  Faculty Associate in Physics Ph.D., University of California (Santa  Barbara), 1993. Principal Staff, Jet  Propulsion Laboratory, 1996-. Caltech,  2004-.Wei Gao, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Medical Engi -neering; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute; Ronald and JoAnne  Willens Scholar B.S., Huazhong University of Science & Technology, 2007; M.S., Tsinghua  University, 2009; Ph.D., University of  California, San Diego, 2014. Caltech,  2017-; HMRI Investigator, 2021-;  Willens Scholar, 2021-.. Daniel A Garcia  Lecturer in Spanish  Lic., National University of Columbia, 1988; M.A., University of Southern  California, 1991. Caltech, 1996-. Javier Garcia  Research Assistant Professor of  Physics B.S., La Universidad del Zulia, Vene -zuela, 2003; M.S., Venezuelan Institute  of Scientific Research, 2005; Ph.D.,  Catholic University of America, 2010.  Caltech, 2019-.Jorge (Jordi) Garcia-Ojalvo  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering M.Sc., University of Barcelona, 1991;  Ph.D., 1995. Associate Professor,  Technical University of Catalonia,   2003-. Caltech, 2006-13; 2018-22.George R Gavalas, Ph.D. Professor of Chemical Engineering,  Emeritus B.S., Technical University of Athens,  1958; M.S., University of Minnesota, 1962; Ph.D., 1964. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1964-67; Associate Professor,  1967-75; Professor, 1975-2002; Pro -fessor Emeritus, 2002-.Emmanuel Gdoutos Visiting Associate in Aerospace  M.S., National Technical University of  Athens, 1971; Ph.D., 1973. Clark B Mil-likan Visiting Professor of Aerospace,  2013; 2014; 2016. Caltech, 2017-22.Glen A George Teaching Professor of Electrical Engi -neering B.S. (Engineering and Applied Sci-ence), Caltech, 1981; B.S. (Electrical Engineering), 1982; M.S., University of California (Los Angeles), 1984. Lecturer  in Applied Science, Caltech, 1986-1991; Lecturer in Computer Science  and Electrical Engineering, 1992-2015; Lecturer in Electrical Engineering,  2015-2019; Teaching Professor of  Electrical Engineering, 2020-.  Lecturer in Applied Physics and Mate -rials Science B.S., California State University, 1986;  M.S., Caltech, 2008. Lecturer, 2005-09;  2010-21.Morteza Gharib, Ph.D. Hans W. Liepmann Professor of Aero -nautics and Bioinspired Engineering;  Booth-Kresa Leadership Chair, Center  for Autonomous Systems and Technol -ogies; Director, Graduate Aerospace  Laboratories; Director, Center for Au -tonomous Systems and Technologies  B.S., Teheran University, 1976; M.S.,  Syracuse University, 1978; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1983. Professor of Aero -nautics, 1992-2001; Professor of  Aeronautics and Bioengineering,  2001-02; Liepmann Professor of Aero -nautics and Bioengineering, 2002-06; Professor of Bioengineering, 2006-09;  Professor of Bioinspired Engineering,  2009-13; Liepmann Professor, 2006-;  Director, Linde Institute, 2014-15; Vice  Provost, 2010-16; Director, Graduate  Aerospace Laboratories, 2015-; Direc -tor, Center for Autonomous Systems  and Technologies, 2017-; Booth-Kresa  Leadership Chair, 2018-. Konstantinos P Giapis Professor of Chemical Engineering  Dipl., National Technical University  of Athens, 1984; Ph.D., University of Minnesota, 1989. Lacey Instructor,  Caltech, 1992-93; Assistant Professor,  1993-98; Associate Professor, 1999- 2010; Professor, 2010-. 804Trustees, Administration, FacultyMTrustees, Administration, Faculty 805Historical SketchLMichael B Gibilisco, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Political Science  B.A., Creighton University, 2010; M.A.,  University of Rochester, 2014; Ph.D.,  2017; Caltech, 2017-.Kevin M Gilmartin, Ph.D. William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of  English; Allen V.C. Davis and Lenabelle  Davis Leadership Chair, Student Affairs;  Vice President for Student Affairs  B.A., Oberlin College, 1985; M.A., Uni-versity of Chicago, 1986; Ph.D., 1991. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1991-97;  Associate Professor of Literature,  1997-2004; Associate Professor of En -glish, 2004-07; Professor, 2007-18; Ke -nan Professor, 2018-; Davis Leadership  Chair, 2020-. Dean of Undergraduate  Students, 2016-20; Vice President,  Student Affairs, 2020-. Dehn Gilmore, Ph.D.  Professor of English  B.A., Harvard University, 2002; M.Phil.,  University of Cambridge (Trinity  College), 2003; M.Phil., Columbia University, 2005; Ph.D., 2009. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2009-15; Professor,  2015-.David M Glover Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.A., University of Cambridge, 1969; Ph.D., University College (London), 1972.  Caltech, 2019-.William A (Bill) Goddard, Ph.D.  Charles and Mary Ferkel Professor  of Chemistry, Materials Science, and  Applied Physics B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1960; Ph.D., Caltech, 1965. Noyes Research Fellow in Chemistry,  1964-66; Noyes Research Instructor,  1966-67; Assistant Professor of Theo -retical Chemistry, 1967-71; Associate  Professor, 1971-74; Professor, 1974- 78; Professor of Chemistry and Applied  Physics, 1978-84; Ferkel Professor of  Chemistry, 1984-2001; Ferkel Profes -sor of Chemistry, Materials Science,  and Applied Physics, 2001-.Lea A Goentoro, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology  B.S., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2001; Ph.D., Princeton University,  2006. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2011-18; Professor, 2018-. Peter Goldreich, Ph.D.  Lee A. DuBridge Professor of As -trophysics and Planetary Physics,  Emeritus B.S., Cornell University, 1960; Ph.D.,  1963. Associate Professor of Planetary  Science and Astronomy, Caltech,  1966-69; Professor, 1969-81; DuBridge  Professor of Astrophysics and Plan -etary Physics, 1981-2002; DuBridge Professor Emeritus, 2002-. Acting  Chairman, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, 1989.Paul F Goldsmith Visiting Associate in Astronomy  A.B., University of California, 1969;  Ph.D., 1975. Principal Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 2005-. Caltech,  2006-21.Matthew Golombek Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  A.B., Rutgers College, 1976; M.S., Uni-versity of Massachusetts, 1978; Ph.D., 1981. Caltech, 2012-22.Sunil Golwala, Ph.D. Professor of Physics; Director, Caltech  Submillimeter Observatory; Deputy Executive Officer for Astrophysics  B.A., University of Chicago, 1993; M.A., University of California, Berkeley,  1995; Ph.D., 2000. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2003-10; Associate Professor,  2010; Professor, 2010-; Director,  Caltech Submillimeter Observatory,  2013-; Deputy Executive Officer, 2019-. David L Goodstein, Ph.D. Frank J. Gilloon Distinguished Teaching  and Service Professor, Emeritus; Pro -fessor of Physics and Applied Physics, Emeritus B.S., Brooklyn College, 1960; Ph.D.,  University of Washington, 1965.  Research Fellow in Physics, Caltech,  1966-67; Assistant Professor, 1967-71;  Associate Professor, 1971-75; Associ -ate Professor of Physics and Applied  Physics, 1975-76; Professor, 1976- 2009; Gilloon Professor, 1995-2009;  Gilloon Professor Emeritus, 2009-. Vice  Provost, 1987-2007. Judith R Goodstein University Archivist, Emeritus  B.A., Brooklyn College, 1960; Ph.D.,  University of Washington, 1969.  Faculty Associate, Caltech, 1982-2009; Lecturer, 1989; 2001; 2002;  2007. Registrar, 1989-2003; Institute  Archivist, 1968-95; University Archivist,  1995-2009; University Archivist, Emer -itus, 2009-.805Officers and Faculty 806Roy W Gould, Ph.D. Simon Ramo Professor of Engineering,  Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1949; M.S., Stanford  University, 1950; Ph.D., Caltech, 1956.  Assistant Professor of Electrical Engi -neering, 1955-58; Associate Professor,  1958-60; Associate Professor of Elec -trical Engineering and Physics, 1960-62; Professor, 1962-74; Professor of  Applied Physics, 1974-80; Ramo Pro -fessor of Engineering, 1980-96; Ramo Professor Emeritus, 1996-. Executive  Officer for Applied Physics, 1973-79;  Chairman, Division of Engineering and Applied Science, 1979-85.Thomas B Graber, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics  A.B., Harvard, 1994; M.A. University of  California (Los Angeles), 1995; Ph.D.,  1998. Associate Professor, Caltech,  2005-08; Professor, 2008-. Viviana Gradinaru, Ph.D.  Professor of Neuroscience and Biolog -ical Engineering; Director, Center for  Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2005; Ph.D., Stanford University, 2010.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2012; As -sistant Professor, 2012-18; Professor,  2018-; HMRI Investigator, 2015-21;  Director, 2017-. Matthew J Graham Research Professor of Astronomy  B.A., Trinity College, University of Ox -ford, 1993; Ph.D., University of Central  Lancashire, 1996. Lecturer, 2017;  Research Professor, 2017-. Jonathan Grandidier Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., Ecole de Technologie Superiure,  2003; M.S., Ecole d'Ingenieurs, 2003; Ph.D., Universite de Bourgogne, 2009.  Caltech, 2019-21.Robert W Graves Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.S, University of California, Riverside,  1984; M.S., California Institute of Tech -nology, 1988; Ph.D., 1990. Caltech,  2012-14; 2015-22.Harry B Gray, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.,  D.L.h.c., Fil.dr.h.c., Laurea.h.c.,  Ph.D.h.c., D.h.c. Arnold O. Beckman Professor of  Chemistry; Founding Director, Beck -man Institute B.S., Western Kentucky College, 1957;  Ph.D., Northwestern University, 1960;  D.Sc.h.c., Northwestern University;  University of Rochester; University of Chicago; University Paul Sabatier(-France); Göteborg University; Univer -sity of Pennsylvania; Bowling Green  State University; University of Arizona; Colombia University; Oberlin College; Carleton University (Canada); Univer-sity of South Carolina; University of  Copenhagen; University of Edinburgh;  Occidental College; Simon Fraser University; Carleton College; Fil.dr.h.c.,  Gothenburg University; Bowling Green  State University; Laurea h.c., University  of Florence; D.L.h.c., Illinois Wesley -an University; Ph.D.h.c., Weizmann  Institute of Science (Israel); Visiting  Professor of Inorganic Chemistry,  Caltech, 1965; Professor of Chemistry,  1966-81; William R. Kenan Professor,  1976-81; Beckman Professor, 1981-.  Chairman, Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 1978-84; Di-rector, Beckman Institute, 1986-2001;  Founding Director, 2001-. Julia R Greer, Ph.D.  Ruben F. and Donna Mettler Professor  of Materials Science, Mechanics and Medical Engineering; Fletcher Jones Foundation Director of the Kavli Nano -science Institute B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1997; M.S., Stanford University,  2000; Ph.D., Stanford University, 2005.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2007-13;  Professor, 2013-19; Mettler Professor,  2019-; Fletcher Jones Foundation Director, 2019-. David M Grether, Ph.D.  Frank J. Gilloon Professor of Econom -ics, Emeritus B.S., University of California, 1960;  Ph.D., Stanford University, 1969.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 1970- 75; Professor, 1975-2009; Gilloon  Professor, 2009-10; Gilloon Professor,  Emeritus, 2010-. Executive Officer for  Social Sciences, 1978-82; Chairman, Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, 1982-92; Interim Chair,  Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, 2006-07.Zeev Gross  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.Sc., Bar-Ilan University (Israel), 1979;  M.Sc., 1982; Ph.D., 1987. Visitor,  Caltech, 1999, 2009; Moore Distin -guished Scholar, 2013-14; Visiting  Associate, 2011, 2017-21.Trustees, Administration, FacultyTrustees, Administration, Faculty 807John P Grotzinger, Ph.D.  Harold Brown Professor of Geology;  Ted and Ginger Jenkins Leadership  Chair, Division of Geological and Plane -tary Sciences B.S., Hobart College, 1979; M.S., University of Montana, 1981; Ph.D., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State  University, 1985. Visiting Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1996; Moore Distin -guished Scholar, 2004; Fletcher Jones  Professor, 2005-21; Harold Brown  Professor, 2021-Division Chair, 2014-;  Jenkins Leadership Chair, 2016-. Robert H (Bob) Grubbs, Nobel Laureate, Ph.D.  Victor and Elizabeth Atkins Professor of  Chemistry B.S., University of Florida, 1963; M.S., 1965; Ph.D., Columbia University,  1968. Professor, Caltech, 1978-90;  Atkins Professor, 1990-. Sergei G. Gukov John D. MacArthur Professor of Theo -retical Physics and Mathematics  B.S., Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 1997; M.S., Princeton Uni -versity 2001; Ph.D., 2001. Associate Professor, Caltech, 2005-07; Professor,  2007-21; MacArthur Professor, 2021-. Michael C Gurnis, Ph.D.  John E. and Hazel S. Smits Professor  of Geophysics; Director, Seismological  Laboratory; Director, Schmidt Academy  for Software Engineering  B.S., University of Arizona, 1982; Ph.D., Australian National University,  1987. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1994-96; Professor, 1996-2005. Smits  Professor, 2005-. Associate Director,  Seismological Laboratory, 1995-2003;  Director, 2009-; Director, Schmidt  Academy, 2019-. Mitchell Guttman, Ph.D. Professor of Biology  B.S., University of Pennsylvania, 2006; M.S., 2006; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2012-13; Assistant Professor, 2013-19; Professor, 2019-;  HMRI Investigator, 2015-21. Ryan G Hadt, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Chemistry  B.S., University of Minnesota, Duluth, 2007; M.S., 2008; Ph.D., Stanford  University, 2014; Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2018; Assistant Professor,  2018-.Cindy Hagan Research Assistant Professor of Neu -roscience  B.A. University of California (Los An -geles), 1999; Ph.D., University of York,  2010. Caltech, 2016-.S A (Ali) Hajimiri, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Electrical Engineer -ing and Medical Engineering; Co-Direc -tor, Space-Based Solar Power Project  B.S., Sharif University of Technology,  1994; M.S., Stanford University, 1996;  Ph.D., 1998. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1998-2003; Associate Professor, 2003-06; Professor, 2006- 10; Myers Professor, 2010-16; Bren  Professor, 2016-; Executive Officer,  2015-18; Director, Information Science  and Technology, 2015-16; Co-Director,  2016-.John F Hall, Ph.D. Professor of Civil Engineering, Emeritus  B.S., West Virginia University, 1972;  M.S., University of Illinois, 1973; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1980. Research  Fellow, Caltech, 1980-83; Lecturer,  1981-83; Assistant Professor, 1983-89;  Associate Professor, 1989-97; Professor,  1997-19; Professor Emeritus, 2019-. Ex -ecutive Officer for Civil Engineering and  Applied Mechanics, 1998-2005. Dean,  2005-10; Acting Vice President, 2006-07. Susanne E Hall Teaching Professor of Writing and Direc -tor of the Hixon Writing Center  B.A., Wake Forest University, 2001; M.A.,  University of California, Irvine, 2003;  Ph.D., 2008.  Caltech, 2012-.Gregg W Hallinan, Ph.D.  Professor of Astronomy; Director, Owens  Valley Radio Observatory  B.Sc., National University of Ireland,  2002; Ph.D., 2008. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2012-18; Professor, 2018-;  Director, 2019-. John M Harris Visiting Associate in Geology  B.Sc., University of Leicester (United  Kingdom), 1964; M.A., University of  Texas (Austin), 1967; Ph.D., University  of Bristol, 1970. Chief Curator, George  C. Page Museum, 1993-2014. Caltech,  2001-21.Fiona A Harrison, Ph.D., D.techn.h.c. Harold A. Rosen Professor of Physics;  Kent and Joyce Kresa Leadership Chair,  Division of Physics, Mathematics and  Astronomy  A.B., Dartmouth College, 1985; 807Historical SketchNOfficers and Faculty 808Trustees, Administration, FacultyQPh.D., University of California, 1993;  D.techn.h.c., Danish Technical Univer -sity. Robert Millikan Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1993-95; Assistant Professor  of Physics, 1995-99; Assistant Profes -sor of Physics and Astronomy, 1999- 2001; Associate Professor 2001-2005;  Professor, 2005-13; Rosen Professor,  2013-; Division Chair; 2015-; Kresa  Leadership Chair, 2015-. Babak Hassibi, Ph.D. Mose and Lillian S. Bohn Professor of  Electrical Engineering and Computing and Mathematical Sciences B.S., University of Tehran, 1989; M.S.,  Stanford University, 1993; Ph.D, 1996.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2001- 03; Associate Professor, 2003-2008;  Professor, 2008-2013; Binder/Amgen  Professor, 2013-16; Executive Officer,  2008-15; Associate Director, 2010- 2012; Bohn Professor, 2016-. Kristine L Haugen, Ph.D. Professor of English  B.A., University of Chicago, 1996; M.A., Princeton University, 1998; Ph.D.,  2001. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2005-11; Professor, 2011-. Egill Hauksson Research Professor of Geophysics  M.S., University of Trondheim (Nor -way), 1974; M.A., Columbia University,  1978; M. Phil., 1980; Ph.D., 1981. Research Fellow, Caltech, 1989-92;  Senior Research Associate, 1992- 2014, Research Professor of Geophys -ics, 2014-.Bruce A Hay, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology  B.A., Claremont McKenna College,  1982; Ph.D., University of California  (San Francisco), 1989. Assistant Pro -fessor, Caltech, 1996-2002; Associate  Professor, 2002-08; Professor, 2008-. Thomas H Heaton, Ph.D. Professor of Engineering Seismology,  Emeritus B.S., Indiana University, 1972; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1978. Visiting Associate in  Geophysics, 1980-91; Faculty Associ-ate, 1991-95; Lecturer in Geophysics,  1993-94; Lecturer in Engineering Seis -mology, 1995; Professor, 1995-2020;  Professor Emeritus, 2020-. John L Heilbron  Visiting Associate in History  A.B., University of California, 1955;  M.A., 1958; Ph.D., 1964. Professor,  1994-. Sherman Fairchild Distinguished  Scholar, Caltech, 1995; Mellon Visiting  Professor, 1997; Eleanor Searle Visiting  Professor, 2011; Visiting Associate,  2011-21.George Helou Research Professor of Physics; Execu -tive Director of the Infrared Processing  and Analysis Center B.S., American University of Beirut, 1975; Ph.D., Cornell University, 1980.  Senior Research Associate, Caltech,  1998-. Executive Director, 1999-. John C Hemminger Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of California, Irvine,  1971; M.S., Harvard University, 1973;  Ph.D., 1976.  Caltech, 2019-21.Sergi R Hildebrandt Visiting Associate in Physics  Ph.D., University of Barcelona, 2011.   Caltech, 2014-22.Andrew Hill  Howard E. and Susanne C. Jessen  Postdoctoral Instructor in English B.A., Reed College, 2010; M.A., University of Chicago, 2012; M.A., University of California (Irvine), 2015;  Ph.D., 2021.  Caltech, 2021-23.Michael G Hill Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.A., Macalester College, 1987; Ph.D., University of Minnesota, 1992. Assis-tant Professor, Occidental College,  1994-. Research Fellow, Caltech,  1992-94; Visiting Associate, 1995- 2010; 2014-24; Lecturer, 2008. Lynne Hillenbrand, Ph.D.  Professor of Astronomy  A.B., Princeton University, 1989; M.S.,  1989; Ph.D., University of Massa-chusetts, 1995. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2000-06; Associate Professor,  2006-10; Professor, 2010-; Executive  Officer, 2007-12. Alexander V (Alex) Hirsch, Ph.D. Professor of Political Science  B.A., Yale University, 2003; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 2010. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 2014-16; Professor,  2016-.Christopher R Hitchcock, Ph.D. J. O. and Juliette Koepfli Professor of  Philosophy; Executive Officer for the  Humanities A.B., Princeton University, 1986; M.A.  (Philosophy); M.A. (Mathematics),  University of Pittsburgh, 1990; Ph.D.,  Trustees, Administration, Faculty 809Historical SketchP8091993. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1998-2002; Professor, 2002-14; Koepfli  Professor, 2014-; Executive Officer,  2018-.David G Hitlin, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.A., Columbia University, 1963;  M.A., 1965; Ph.D., 1968. Associate Professor, Caltech, 1979-85; Professor,  1986-.Andre Hoelz, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemistry and Biochem -istry  B.Sc., Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, 1993; M.Sc.,1997; Ph.D.,  Rockefeller University, 2004. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2010-16; Professor  2016-; HMRI Investigator, 2015-21.  Rea A. and Lela G. Axline Professor of  Business Economics and History A.B., Harvard College, 1969; M.A.,  University of California, 1971; Ph.D.,  Yale University, 1979. Lecturer in  History, Caltech, 1980-81; Instructor,  1981-82; Assistant Professor, 1982-84;  Associate Professor of History and  Social Science, 1984-95; Professor,  1995-2003; Richard and Barbara  Rosenberg Professor of History and  Social Science, 2003-08; Axline Pro -fessor, 2008-. Executive Officer for the  Humanities, 1995-2000.Franca Karoline Olga (Franca)  Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., Imperial College London, 2010; M.S., 2013; Ph.D.,  University of Cambridge, 2017. Caltech, Instructor,  2017-20; Visiting Associate, 2020-22.  John S. and Sherry Chen Professor of  Environmental Science  B.A., Northwestern University, 1968;  Ph.D., Brown University, 1974. Re -search Fellow, Caltech, 1973-76; As -sociate Professor, 1980-85; Professor  of Environmental Engineering Science,  1986-90; Professor of Environmental  Chemistry, 1990-96; James Irvine  Professor of Environmental Science,  1996-16; Wu Professor, 2016-18; Chen  Professor, 2018-; Executive Officer for  Environmental Engineering Science,  1996-2002; Dean of Graduate Studies, 2002-2009.Douglas C Hofmann Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of California (San Di -ego), 2003; M.S., 2004; M.S., California  Institute of Technology, 2006; Ph.D.,  2008. Lecturer, 2011-21.  Visiting Asso -ciate, 2011-21.Jocelyn Holland, Ph.D. Professor of Comparative Literature  B.A., Harvard-Radcliffe College,  1995; M.A., Johns Hopkins University,  1998; Ph.D., 2003.  Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2016-17; Professor, 2017-. Roy J Holt Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., Southern Methodist University,  1969; M.Phil., Yale University, 1971;  Ph.D., 1972. Professor, University of Il -linois, 1994-2001. Visiting Associate in  Theoretical Physics, Caltech, 2017-22;  Argonne Distinguished Fellow, 2007-. Elizabeth J (Betty) Hong, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Neuroscience;  Chen Scholar B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2002; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2009.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2014-15;  Assistant Professor, 2015-; Boothe  Luce Assistant Professor, 2015-21.  Roscoe G. Dickinson Professor of  Chemistry and Biology, Emeritus  A.B., Swarthmore College, 1954; Ph.D.,  Cornell University, 1958. Dickinson  Professor, Caltech, 1980-97; Dickinson  Professor Emeritus, 1997-. Philip F (Phil) Hopkins, Ph.D. Professor of Theoretical Astrophysics;  Executive Officer for Astronomy  B.A., Princeton University, 2004; M.A.,  Harvard University, 2005; Ph.D., 2008.  Assistant Professor Caltech, 2013-16;  Associate Professor, 2016-17; Profes -sor, 2017-; Executive Officer, 2019-. Julia M Hori Fletcher Jones Foundation Postdoctor-al Instructor in Contemporary Literature  B.A., University of Toronto, 2011; M.A.,  2012; Ph.D., Princeton University,  2020. Caltech, 2020-22.Cassandra V Horii Lecturer in Engineering  B.A., University of Colorado, Boulder,  1995; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2002.  Caltech, 2019; 2021.Officers and Faculty 810Hans G Hornung, Ph.D., D.h.c.  C. L. "Kelly" Johnson Professor of  Aeronautics, Emeritus  B.S., University of Melbourne, 1960;  M.S., 1962; Ph.D., University of Lon-don (Imperial College), 1965; D.h.c., Swiss Federal Institute of Technology.  Johnson Professor, Caltech, 1987- 2005; Johnson Professor Emeritus,  2005-. Director, Graduate Aeronautical  Laboratories, 1987-2004.Yizhao T (Thomas) Hou, Ph.D.  Charles Lee Powell Professor of Ap -plied and Computational Mathematics B.S., South China University of Technology, 1982; M.S., University of  California (Los Angeles), 1985; Ph.D.,  1987. Associate Professor of Applied  Mathematics, Caltech, 1993-98; Professor, 1998-2000; Professor of  Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics, 2000-04; Powell Professor, 2004-.  Executive Officer for Applied and Com -putational Mathematics, 2000-06.Melissa Hovik Teaching Assistant Professor of Com -puting and Mathematical Sciences B.S., University of Washington, 2018;  M.S., 2020. Caltech, 2020-.Andrew W Howard, Ph.D.  Professor of Astronomy  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1998; M.A., Harvard University,  2001; Ph.D., 2006. Caltech, 2016-.James B Howard  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.A., DePauw University, 1964; Ph.D.,  University of California (Los Angeles),  1968. Professor, University of Minneso -ta, 1982-. Caltech, 1996-2021.Elaine Y Hsiao Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles) 2006; Ph.D., Caltech, 2013. Research Assistant Professor, 2014- 15; Caltech, 2015-22.David Hsieh, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.S., Stanford University, 2003; Ph.D.,  Princeton University, 2009. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2012-18; Professor,  2018-.Linda C Hsieh-Wilson, Ph.D. Milton and Rosalind Chang Professor  of Chemistry B.S., Yale University, 1990; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1996. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2000-06; Associate  Professor, 2006-10; Professor, 2010-2- 17; Hanisch Professor, 2017-20; Chang  Professor, 2021-; HHMI Investigator,  2005-14.Renyu Hu Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.S., Tsinghua University, 2007; Dip.  Eng., Ecole Centrale Paris, 2009; M.Sc., Tsinghua University, 2009;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2013. Caltech, 2015-23. Alice S Huang Senior Faculty Associate in Biology and Biological Engineering B.A., Johns Hopkins University,  1961; M.S., 1963; Ph.D., 1966. M.A. h.c., Harvard University; D.Sci.h.c.,  Wheaton College; Mt. Holyoke College; Medical College of Pennsylvania. Faculty Associate, Caltech, 1997-2007; Senior Faculty Associate, 2007-.Mario Hubert Howard E. and Susanne C. Jessen  Postdoctoral Instructor in Philosophy of Physics M.S., Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, 2013; Ph.D., University of Lau-sanne, 2016. Caltech, 2019-2022.Kenneth W Hudnut Visiting Associate in Geophysics  A.B., Dartmouth College, 1983; M.A., Columbia University, 1986; Ph.D.,  1989. Geophysicist and Project  Chief, U.S. Geological Survey, 1992-.  Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1989-92;  Visiting Associate, 1997-2021. Melany L Hunt, Ph.D. Dotty and Dick Hayman Professor of  Mechanical Engineering B.S., University of Minnesota, 1983; M.S., University of California, 1985;  Ph.D., 1987. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1988-95; Associate Professor,  1995-2001; Professor, 2001-2011;  Kenan Professor, 2012-13; Hayman  Professor, 2013-; Executive Officer,  2002-2007; Vice Provost, 2007-14. Allen L Husker Research Professor of Geophysics  B.S., University of Washington, 1998;  M.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 2003; Ph.D., 2008. Visiting  Associate, 2020. Caltech, 2021-.Thomas M Hutchcroft, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics  B.A., University of Cambridge, 2013; Ph.D., University of British Colombia, 2017. Caltech, 2021-.Trustees, Administration, Faculty Nicholas R (Nick) Hutzler, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Physics  B.S., California Institute of Technol -ogy, 2007; A.M., Harvard University,  2009; Ph.D., 2014. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2017; Assistant Professor,  2017-.Andrew P Ingersoll, Ph.D.  Professor of Planetary Science  B.A., Amherst College, 1960; A.M., Harvard University, 1961; Ph.D., 1966.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1966- 71; Associate Professor, 1971-76;  Professor, 1976-2003; 2011-; Anthony  Professor, 2003-11. Executive Officer  for Planetary Science, 1987-94.Philip (Phil) Isett, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  B.S., University of Maryland, 2008; Ph.D., Princeton University, 2013;  Caltech, Assistant Professor, 2018-19,  Professor, 2019-. Rustem F Ismagilov, Ph.D.  Ethel Wilson Bowles and Robert Bowles  Professor of Chemistry and Chemical  Engineering; Merkin Institute Professor;  Director of the Jacobs Institute for Mo -lecular Engineering for Medicine B.S., Higher Chemical College of the  Russian Academy of Sciences, 1994;  Ph.D., University of Wisconsin, Madison,  1998. Miles Professor, Caltech, 2011- 13; Bowles Professor, 2013-; Director,  Jacobs Institute, 2013-.Jennifer M Jackson, Ph.D. William E. Leonhard Professor of  Mineral Physics B.S., University of Illinois (Urba-na-Champaign), 1999; M.S., University of Notre Dame, 2000; Ph.D., University  of Illinois, 2005. Assistant Professor  of Geophysics, Caltech, 2007-09; Assistant Professor of Mineral Physics,  2009-12; Professor, 2012-20; Leonhard  Professor, 2020-. Brian R Jacobson, Ph.D. Professor of Visual Culture  B.S., Appalachian State University,  2002; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2005; Ph.D., University  of Southern California, 2011. Caltech,  2020-.Jennifer A Jahner, Ph.D.  Professor of English  B.A., Western Washington University,  1998; M.A., University of Colorado at Boulder, 2005, Ph.D., University  of Pennsylvania, 2012. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2012-19; Professor,  2019-.Robyn M Javier Lecturer in Engineering  B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 2002; M.S., 2007; Ph.D., University of California (San Francisco),  2012.  Caltech, 2018-2021.Paul C Jennings, Ph.D. Professor of Civil Engineering and  Applied Mechanics, Emeritus B.S., Colorado State University, 1958;  M.S., Caltech, 1960; Ph.D., 1963. Research Fellow in Civil Engineering,  1965; Assistant Professor of Applied  Mechanics, 1966-68; Associate Profes -sor, 1968-72; Professor, 1972-77; Pro -fessor of Civil Engineering and Applied Mechanics, 1977-2002; 2004-2007. Professor Emeritus, 2002-04; 2007-.  Executive Officer for Civil Engineering  and Applied Mechanics, 1975-80; Chairman, Division of Engineering and Applied Science, 1985-89; Vice Presi -dent and Provost, 1989-95; Acting Vice  President for Business and Finance,  1995; 1998-99; Provost, 2004-07. Grant J Jensen, Ph.D. Professor of Biophysics and Biology  B.S., Brigham Young University, 1994;  Ph.D., Stanford University, 1999. As -sistant Professor, Caltech, 2002-2008;  Associate Professor, 2008-10; Profes -sor, 2010-; HHMI Investigator, 2008-20. Jack L Jewell Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of Florida, 1975; M.S., Florida Institute of Technology, 1977;  M.S., University of Arizona, 1981; Ph.D., 1984. Caltech 2020-2022.Lawrence J Jin, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Finance  B.S., Tsinghua University China, 2005;  M.S., California Institute of Technology,  2006; Ph.D., Yale University, 2015.  Caltech, 2015-.William L Johnson, Ph.D. Ruben F. and Donna Mettler Professor  of Engineering and Applied Science, Emeritus B.A., Hamilton College, 1970; Ph.D., Caltech, 1975. Assistant Professor of  Materials Science, 1977-80; Associate Professor, 1980-84; Professor, 1984- 89; Mettler Professor, 1989-2019;  Mettler Professor Emeritus, 2019-. Lucile M (Lucy) Jones Visiting Associate in Geophysics  A.B., Brown University, 1976; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technol -ogy, 1981. Research Associate, U.S.  811811Officers and Faculty Geological Survey, 1984-. Caltech,  1984-2022.Catherine Jurca, Ph.D.  Professor of English  B.A., University of California, 1987;  M.A., Johns Hopkins University, 1992;  Ph.D., 1995. Instructor, Caltech, 1995;  Assistant Professor, 1995-2001; Asso -ciate Professor of Literature, 2001-04;  Associate Professor of English,  2004-10; Professor, 2010-; Master of  Student Houses, 2002-09; Executive Officer, 2014-18. David A Kahn Lecturer in Psychology  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2006; Ph.D., University of Pennsylva-nia, 2015. Caltech, 2020.Richard Kalantar Ohanian  Lecturer in Electrical Engineering  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2005; M.S., 2007. Caltech, 2019-21.Sophia Kalantzakos Visiting Associate in the Humanities  B.A., Yale University, 1987; M.A.,  Columbia University, 1998; Ph.D.,  University of the Peloponnese, 2013. Caltech, 2020-21.Karanjit Kalsi Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences M. Eng., University of Sheffield,  2006; Ph.D., Purdue University, 2010.  Caltech, 2017-21.Hiroo Kanamori, Ph.D.  John E. and Hazel S. Smits Professor  of Geophysics, Emeritus B.S., University of Tokyo, 1959; M.S.,  1961; Ph.D., 1964. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1965-66; Professor, 1972-89;  Smits Professor, 1989-2005; Smits  Professor Emeritus, 2005-. Director,  Seismological Laboratory, 1990-98. Anton N Kapustin, Ph.D. Earle C. Anthony Professor of Theoreti -cal Physics and Mathematics M.S., Moscow State University, 1993;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1997. Assistant Pro -fessor, 2001-04; Associate Professor,  2004-10; Professor, 2010-12; Earle C.  Anthony Professor, 2012-. Mikhail Karpukhin Harry Bateman Instructor in Mathe-matics M.S., Moscow State University, 2013;  Ph.D., McGill University, 2018. Caltech  2020-23.Mansi M Kasliwal, Ph.D. Professor of Astronomy  B.S., Cornell University, 2005; M.S.,  Caltech, 2007; Ph.D., 2011. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2014-15; Assistant Professor, 2015-21; Professor, 2021-. Jonathan N Katz, Ph.D. Kay Sugahara Professor of Social  Sciences and Statistics S.B., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1990; M.A., University of Cali -fornia (San Diego), 1992; Ph.D., 1995.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1995-98;  Associate Professor, 1998; 1999- 2003; Professor, 2003-11; Sugahara  Professor, 2012-; Executive Officer for  the Social Sciences, 2007; Director,  Linde Institute, 2013-14; Division Chair,  2007-14.Nets H Katz, Ph.D. International Business Machines Pro -fessor of Mathematics B.A., Rice University, 1990; Ph.D.,  University of Pennsylvania, 1993. Pro -fessor, Caltech, 2013-; IBM Professor,  2016-.Alexander Kechris, Ph.D., D.h.c. Professor of Mathematics  M.S., National Technical University,  Athens, 1969; Ph.D., University of Cal-ifornia, Los Angeles, 1972; D.h.c., Uni -versity of Athens. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1974-76; Associate Professor,  1976-81; Professor, 1981-. Executive  Officer for Mathematics, 1994-97. Mary B Kennedy, Ph.D.  The Allen and Lenabelle Davis Profes -sor of Biology B.S., St. Mary's College, 1969; Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University, 1975. Assis -tant Professor, Caltech, 1981-84; As -sociate Professor, 1984-92; Professor,  1992-2002; Davis Professor, 2002-. Daniel J Kevles, Ph.D. J. O. and Juliette Koepfli Professor of  the Humanities, Emeritus A.B., Princeton University, 1960; Ph.D.,  1964. Assistant Professor of History,  Caltech, 1964-68; Associate Professor,  1968-78; Professor, 1978-86; Koepfli  Professor of the Humanities, 1986- 2001; Koepfli Professor Emeritus,  2001-. Executive Officer for the  Humanities, 1978-81.Farbod Khoshnoud Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., Azad University, 1998; M.S.,  2001; Ph.D., Brunel University London, 2005. Caltech, 2020-22.812Trustees, Administration, FacultyVTrustees, Administration, Faculty 813Historical SketchT Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1998; Ph.D., University of Utah, 2008.  Caltech, 2018-21.D R (Rod) Kiewiet, Ph.D. Professor of Political Science  B.A., University of Iowa, 1974; Ph.D., Yale University, 1980. Assistant Pro -fessor, Caltech, 1979-82; Associate  Professor, 1982-89; Professor, 1989-.  Dean of Students, 1992-96; Dean of Graduate Studies, 2000-02; Dean of Undergraduate Students, 2011-14. Hyung Min (Hyungmin) Kim Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Seoul National University, 1999;  M.S., 2001; Ph.D., University of Bern,  Switzerland, 2011.  Caltech, 2020-21.H. J Kimble, Ph.D.; D.Sc.h.c. William L. Valentine Professor of Phys -ics, Emeritus B.S., Abilene Christian University,  1971; M.S., University of Rochester,  1973; Ph.D., 1978; D.Sc.h.c., Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copen-hagen. Professor, Caltech, 1989-;  Valentine Professor, 1997-21; Valentine  Professor Emeritus, 2021-. Joseph (Joe) Kirschvink, Ph.D. Nico and Marilyn Van Wingen Professor  of Geobiology B.S., M.S., Caltech, 1975; M.A., Princ-eton University, 1978; Ph.D., 1979.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1981-87;  Associate Professor, 1987-92; Profes -sor, 1992-2004; Van Wingen Professor,  2004-.Alexei Kitaev, Ph.D.  Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of  Theoretical Physics and Mathematics  Dipl., Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 1986; Ph.D., Landau  Institute for Theoretical Physics, 1989.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 1998-99;  Lecturer, 1998-99; Senior Research  Associate, 2001-02; Professor, 2002- 13; Linde Professor, 2013-. Jean Patrice M (Patrice) Klein Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering M.S., Ecole Superieure des Mines,  1971; Ph.D., Paris University, 1973;  Ph.D., Marseille University, 1980. Lec -turer, 2016. Caltech, 2016-23. Dorit Kliemann Visiting Associate in Cognitive Neuro -science M.S., Freie Universitat Berlin, 2008;  Ph.D., 2013. Caltech, 2020-21.Wolfgang G Knauss, Ph.D.  Theodore von  Karman Professor of  Aeronautics and Applied Mechanics,  Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1958; M.S., 1959; Ph.D., 1963. Research Fellow in Aeronautics,  1963-65; Assistant Professor, 1965-69;  Associate Professor, 1969-78; Profes -sor, 1978-82; Professor  of Aeronautics  and Applied Mechanics, 1982-2001; von Karman Professor, 2001-2004; von  Karman Professor Emeritus, 2004-. Heather A Knutson, Ph.D. Professor of Planetary Science  B.Sc., Johns Hopkins University, 2004;  A.M., Harvard University, 2006; Ph.D.,  2009. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2010-11; Assistant Professor, 2011-17;  Professor, 2017-. Jonathan Koch Caltech-Huntington Humanities Collaborations Postdoctoral Instructor and Anne Rothenberg Postdoctoral  Instructor in English B.A., Davidson College, 2011; M.A., Washington University in St. Louis,  2016; Ph.D., 2016. Caltech, 2020-22.Monica D Kohler Research Professor of Mechanical and  Civil Engineering A.B., Harvard University, 1988; Ph.D.,  California Institute of Technology,  1995. Assistant Research Engineer,  University of California (Los Angeles),  1998-2011. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2007-11; Lecturer, 2009, 2012, 2013;  Research Assistant Professor, 2011- 17; Research Professor, 2018-. Charles A Kollmer Ahmanson Postdoctoral Instructor in History of Biology B.A., Williams College, 2010; M.A., New York University, 2013; Ph.D.,  Princeton University, 2020. Caltech,  2020-22.Diana L Kormos-Buchwald, Ph.D. Robert M. Abbey Professor of History  B.Sc., Technion-Israel Institute of  Technology, 1981; M.Sc., Tel Aviv Uni -versity, 1983; A.M., Harvard University,  1985; Ph.D., 1990. Instructor, Caltech,  1989-90; Assistant Professor, 1990-96;  Associate Professor, 1996-2005; Pro -813Officers and Faculty 814Trustees, Administration, Facultyfessor, 2005-2017; Abbey Professor,  2018-.  Elizabeth W. Gilloon Professor of  Chemical Engineering B.S., Caltech, 1983; M.S., 1984; Ph.D., Stanford University, 1988. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1990-95; Associate  Professor, 1995-2001; Professor, 2001- 19; Gilloon Professor, 2020-. Victoria Kostina, Ph.D.  Professor of Electrical Engineering and  Computing and Mathematical Sciences B.S., Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 2004; M.S., University  of Ottawa, 2006; Ph.D., Princeton University, 2013. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2014-2020; Professor, 2020-. J. M (Morgan) Kousser, Ph.D.  Professor of History and Social Sci -ence, Emeritus A.B., Princeton University, 1965;  M.Phil., Yale University, 1968; Ph.D.,  1971. Instructor in History, Caltech,  1969-71; Assistant Professor, 1971-74;  Associate Professor, 1974-79; Profes -sor, 1979-80; Professor of History and  Social Science, 1980-2013, 2018-20; Kenan Professor, 2013-18; Emeritus,  2020-.Anne J Kox Visiting Associate in History  M.S., University of Amsterdam, 1972;  Ph.D., 1976. Pieter Zeeman Professor,  1998-. Visiting Professor, Caltech,  2003; Visiting Associate, 2005-21. Shrinivas R (Shri) Kulkarni, Ph.D.,  D.h.c. George Ellery Hale Professor of Astron -omy and Planetary Science M.S., Indian Institute of Technology,  1978; Ph.D., University of California,  1983; D.h.c., Radboud University.  Millikan Research Fellow in Radio As -tronomy, Caltech, 1985-87; Assistant  Professor of Astronomy, 1987-90;  Associate Professor, 1990-92; Profes -sor, 1992-96; Professor of Astronomy  and Planetary Science, 1996-2001; MacArthur Professor, 2001-17; Hale  Professor, 2017-; Executive Officer  for Astronomy, 1997-2000. Director  of Caltech Optical Observatories, 2006-18.Akiko Kumagai Research Professor of Biology  B.S., Kyoto University (Japan), 1979; Ph.D., 1986. Senior Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1989-95; Senior Research  Associate, 1996-2014; Research Pro -fessor, 2014-. Jenijoy La Belle Ph.D., Professor of English, Emeritus  B.A., University of Washington, 1965;  Ph.D., University of California (San  Diego), 1969. Assistant Professor of  English, Caltech, 1969-76; Associate Professor, 1977-80; Associate Profes -sor of Literature, 1980-88; Professor  of Literature, 1988-2004; Professor of  English, 2004-2007; Professor Emeri -tus, 2007-.Paul F La Porte Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering B.A., University of Chicago, 2005; Ph.D., 2011, M.D., 2012.  Caltech, 2016-21.Jay A Labinger Faculty Associate in Chemistry B.S., Harvey Mudd College, 1968; Ph.D., Harvard University, 1974.  Caltech, 1988-1996; Faculty Associate, 2006-; Lecturer, 2008-11. Michael P Lamb, Ph.D. Professor of Geology  B.S., University of Minnesota, 2001; M.S., University of Washington, 2004;  Ph.D., University of California, Berke -ley, 2008. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2009-14; Professor, 2014-. Robert J Lang Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., California Institute of Technology,  1982; M.S., Stanford University, 1983;  Ph.D., California Institute of Technolo -gy, 1986.  Caltech, 2020-21. Nadia Lapusta, Ph.D. Lawrence A. Hanson, Jr., Professor  of Mechanical Engineering and Geo-physics Dipl., Kiev State University, 1994; M.S.,  Harvard University, 1996; Ph.D., 2001.  Assistant Professor of Mechanical En -gineering, Caltech, 2002-03; Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering  and Geophysics, 2003-08; Associate Professor, 2008-10; Professor, 2010- 19; Hanson Professor, 2019-. Joseph Lazio Visiting Associate in Astronomy  B.S., University of Iowa, 1989; M.S., Cornell University, 1992, Ph.D, 1997.  Caltech, 2010-13; 2016-23.Trustees, Administration, Faculty Jared R Leadbetter, Ph.D.  Professor of Environmental Microbi -ology B.S., Goucher College, 1991; Ph.D., Michigan State University, 1997.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2000-06;  Associate Professor, 2006-10; Profes -sor, 2010-. John O Ledyard, Ph.D., D.Lit.h.c.  Allen and Lenabelle Davis Professor  of Economics and Social Sciences, Emeritus A.B., Wabash College, 1963; M.S.,  Purdue University, 1965; Ph.D., 1967;  D.Lit.h.c., Purdue University. Professor,  Caltech, 1985-2016; Davis Professor,  2002-16; Davis Professor, Emeritus,  2016-. Executive Officer for the Social  Sciences, 1989-92; Chair, Division of  the Humanities and Social Sciences, 1992-2002.Brian Lee Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., University of Southern California,  1999; Ph.D., Caltech, 2006; M.D., University of Southern California, 2008.  Caltech, 2013-22.Darrin J Lee Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering B.S., Brown University, 2002; Ph.D.,  University of California (Davis), 2013;  M.D., University of California (Irvine),  2009. Caltech, 2018-21.Patrick A Lee Visiting Associate in Theoretical  Physics B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1966; Ph.D, 1970. Moore  Distinguished Scholar, 2010. Caltech,  2016-2021.Dennis Lehmkuhl Visiting Associate in History and Philos -ophy of Science MSc., Imperial College London, 2003; M.A., Hamburg University,  2006; DPhil., Oxford University (Oriel  College), 2009.  Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2010, 2012, 2015. Caltech, 2015-18; 2020 - 22.Stephanie Leifer Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.A., University of Pennsylvania, 1989; M.S., California Institute of Technology,  1993; Ph.D., 1995. Caltech, 2021-23.Anthony Leonard, Ph.D.  Theodore von Karman Professor of  Aeronautics, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1959; M.S., Stanford  University, 1960; Ph.D., 1963. Profes -sor, Caltech, 1985-2000;  von Karman  Professor, 2000-2005; von Karman  Professor Emeritus, 2005-. Edan Lepucki Lecturer in Creative Writing  B.A., Oberlin College, 2002; M.F.A.,  University of Iowa, 2006; Caltech, 2021.Henry A Lester, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology  A.B., Harvard College, 1966; Ph.D.,  Rockefeller University, 1971. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1973-76; Associate  Professor, 1976-83; Professor, 1983- 2000, 2017-; Bren Professor, 2000- 2017; Executive Officer, 2010-13. Carmel Levitan Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.A., Stanford University, 2001; Ph.D.,  University of California (San Francisco  & Berkeley), 2007. Caltech, 2009-21.Nathan S (Nate) Lewis, Ph.D. George L. Argyros Professor and Pro -fessor of Chemistry B.S., Caltech, 1977; M.S., 1977; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  1981. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1988-91; Professor, 1991-2001; Argy -ros Professor, 2002-. Scott M Lewis Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B. Eng., Cardiff University, 2002;  M.Sc., 2004; Ph.D., 2009. Research  Fellow, The University of Manchester,  2013-. Caltech, 2018-21.Chen Li Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science Ph.D., California Institute of Technolo -gy, 2012. Caltech, 2016-21. Kenneth G Libbrecht, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics  B.S., Caltech, 1980; Ph.D., Princeton University, 1984. Visiting Associate in  Solar Astronomy, Caltech, 1984; Assis -tant Professor of Astrophysics, 1984- 89; Associate Professor, 1989-95;  Professor of Physics, 1995-. Executive  Officer, 1997-13. 815Historical SketchV815Officers and Faculty E J (John) List, Ph.D. Professor of Environmental Engineering  Science, Emeritus B.E., University of Auckland, 1961; M.E., 1962; Ph.D., Caltech, 1965. Re-search Fellow, 1965-66; Assistant Pro -fessor, 1969-72; Associate Professor,  1972-78; Professor, 1978-97; Professor  Emeritus, 1997-. Executive Officer for  Environmental Science, 1980-85. Charles Y Liu Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S.E., University of Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1987; Ph.D., Rice University,  1993; M.D., Yale University School of  Medicine, 1996. Resident Physician, University of Southern California, Keck  School of Medicine, 1996-. Caltech, 2002-11; 2014-21.Junjie Liu Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering B.S., Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, 2000; M.S.,  2003; Ph.D., University of Maryland, 2007. Caltech, 2017-21.Yang Liu  Visiting Associate in Geochemistry  B.S., Chengdu University of Technolo -gy, 1995; M.S., University of Michigan,  1998; Ph.D., University of Michigan, 2003. Lecturer, 2015; Caltech, 2013- 22.Alexis Livanos Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  1970; M.S., 1972; Ph.D., 1975. Faculty Associate, 2013-2018. Visiting Associ -ate, 2018-22.Carlos Lois Research Professor of Biology  M.D., University of Valencia, 1991;  Ph.D., Rockefeller University, 1995.  Caltech, Visiting Associate, 2014-15;  Research Professor 2015-. Gabriel Lopez-Moctezuma Jassan, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Political Science  B.A., Instituto Tecnologico Automomo  de Mexico, 2007; M.A., Princeton University, 2012; Ph.D., 2016. Caltech,  2017-.Gary A Lorden, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1962; Ph.D., Cornell  University, 1966. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1968-71; Associate Professor,  1971-77; Professor, 1977-2009;  Professor Emeritus, 2009-. Dean of  Students, 1984-88; Vice President for  Student Affairs, 1989-98; Acting Vice  President, 2002; Executive Officer for  Mathematics, 2003-2006.Steven H Low, Ph.D.  Frank J. Gilloon Professor of Comput -ing and Mathematical Sciences and Electrical Engineering B.S., Cornell University, 1987; M.S.,  University of California, 1989; Ph.D.,  1992. Associate Professor, Caltech,  2000-06; Professor, 2006-18; Gilloon  Professor, 2018-. Douglas G (Doug) MacMartin Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.A.Sc., University of Toronto, 1987;  S.M., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1990; Ph.D., 1992. Lecturer,  2001; 2004; 2005; 2009-2014; 2016. Senior Research Fellow, 2002-08; Re -search Professor, 2008-2015. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2000-02; 2015-22.Urmila Mahadev, P{h.  Assistant Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences; Nickerson Scholar B.S., University of Southern California,  2010; Ph.D., University of California,  Berkeley, 2018. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2019-20; Assistant Professor,  2020-; Nickerson Scholar, 2021-. Walid Majid  Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., Swarthmore College, 1986; M.S.,  University of Illinois, Urbana, 1987; Ph.D., 1993.  Caltech, 2015-23.Nikolai Makarov, Ph.D.  Richard Merkin Distinguished Professor  of Mathematics B.A., Leningrad University, 1982;  Ph.D., LOMI Mathematics Institute (Leningrad), 1986. Visiting Professor,  Caltech, 1991; Professor, 1991-13;  Merkin Professor, 2013-. Oscar Mandel, Ph.D. Professor of Literature, Emeritus  B.A., New York University, 1947; M.A.,  Columbia University, 1948; Ph.D.,  Ohio State University, 1951. Visit -ing Associate Professor of English,  Caltech, 1961-62; Associate Professor,  1962-68; Professor, 1968-80; Professor  of Literature, 1980-2003; Professor  Emeritus, 2003-.Krithika Manohar von Karman Instructor in Computing and Mathematical Sciences 816Trustees, Administration, FacultyZTrustees, Administration, Faculty B.S., University of Massachusetts (Lowell), 2013; Ph.D., University of Washington, 2018. Caltech, 2020. Karthish Manthiram Professor of Chemical Engineering and  Chemistry B.S., Stanford University, 2010; Ph.D.,  University of California, Berkeley, 2015.  Visitor, Caltech, 2015-16; Visiting Asso -ciate, 2021; Professor, 2021-. Elena Mantovan, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  Laurea, University of Padova, 1995;  M.A., Harvard University, 1998; Ph.D.,  2002. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2005-10; Associate Professor, 2010;  Professor, 2010-; Executive Officer,  2016-19.Uri M Maoz Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Hebrew University of Jerusalem,  2008; Ph.D., 2008.  Caltech, 2019-21.Alireza Marandi, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Electrical Engi -neering and Applied Physics B.S., University of Tehran, 2006; M.S.,  University of Victoria, 2008; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 2013. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2017-18; Assistant Professor, 2018-. Matilde Marcolli, Ph.D.  Robert F. Christy Professor of Mathe -matics and Computing and Mathemat-ical Sciences Laurea, University Degli Studi, 1993;  M.Sc., University of Chicago, 1994; Ph.D., 1997. Caltech, Professor, 2008- 19, Christy Professor, 2019-. Rudolph A (Rudy) Marcus, Nobel  Laureate, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., Fil.Dr.h.c.,  D.h.c. John G. Kirkwood and Arthur A. Noyes Professor of Chemistry  B.Sc., McGill University, 1943; Ph.D.,  1946; D.Sc.h.c., University of Chicago; McGill University; Polytechnic Univer-sity; University of Oxford; University of  New Brunswick; Queen's University; University of North Carolina (Chapel  Hill); University of Ilinois; Technion-Isra -el Institute of Technology; Universidad  Politecnica de Valencia; University  of Waterloo; Fil.Dr.h.c., Gothenburg  University; D.h.c., Yokohama National  University; Northwestern University.  Noyes Professor, Caltech, 1978-2012;  Kirkwood-Noyes Professor, 2013-. Simone Marras Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering M.S., Politecnico Di Milano, 2005; Ph.D., Polytechnical University of Cat-alonia, 2012. Caltech, 2019-21.Alain J Martin, Ph.D. Professor of Computer Science,  Emeritus B.S., University of Marseille, 1965; Ing., Polytechnic Institute (Grenoble), 1969.  Visiting Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1981-83; Visiting Associate Professor,  1983; Associate Professor, 1983-86;  Professor, 1986-2016; Professor,  Emeritus, 2016-. Executive Officer,  1994-97.Christopher Martin, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.A., Oberlin College, 1978; Ph.D., University of California, 1986. Caltech,  1993-.Sami F Masri Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., University of Texas, 1960; M.S.,  1961; M.S., Caltech, 1962; Ph.D., 1965. Professor, University of Southern  California, 1981-. Research Fellow  in Mechanical Engineering, Caltech, 1965-66; Visiting Associate, 1973;  1981; 1989-96; Visiting Associate in  Civil Engineering, 2002-04, 2010-11; 2016-23.Anthony T Massari Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., New Jersey Institute of Technolo -gy, 2007; M.S., University of California  (Berkeley), 2008; M.S., California  Institute of Technology, 2017; Ph.D.,  2017. Caltech; 2020-21.Dimitri P Mawet, Ph.D. Professor of Astronomy; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Research Scientist  Dipl., University of Liege, 2002; M.Phil., 2004; Ph.D., 2006. Caltech, Associate Professor, 2015-2019; Professor, 2019- . Jet Propulsion Laboratory Research  Scientist, 2015-.Stephen L Mayo, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Biology and  Chemistry; Merkin Institute Professor  B.S., Pennsylvania State University,  1983; Ph.D., Caltech, 1987. Senior Research Fellow, Caltech, 1991-92;  Assistant Professor, 1992-98; Associ -ate Professor, 1998-2003; Professor,  2003-07; Bren Professor, 2007-; HHMI  817Historical SketchX817Officers and Faculty Investigator, 1994-07; Executive Officer  for Biochemistry and Molecular Bio-physics, 2004-07; Vice Provost, 2007- 10; Division Chair, 2010-20; Bowes Jr.  Leadership Chair, 2012-20. Aaron Mazel-Gee  Sherman Fairchild Instructor in Math -ematics B.S., Brown University, 2009; M.S.,  2009; Ph.D., University of California,  Berkeley, 2016. Caltech 2020-23. Sarkis Mazmanian, Ph.D. Luis B. and Nelly Soux Professor of  Microbiology  B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1995; Ph.D., 2002. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2006-12; Professor,  2012-14; Soux Professor, 2014-; HMRI  Investigator, 2015-21. Eric Mazumdar, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences and Economics B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2015; Ph.D., University of  California, Berkeley, 2021. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2021-.  Lecturer in Economics  B.A., College of the Holy Cross, 1989;  MBA, University of California (Los An -geles), 1994; J.D., 1994. Caltech, 2020.Daniel (Dan) McCleese Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering B.S., Antioch College, 1972; D.Phil, University of Oxford, 1976. Chief  Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,  1994-2017. Caltech, 2002-21.Beverley J McKeon, Ph.D. Theodore von Karman Professor of  Aeronautics; EAS Division Deputy Chair  B.A., University of Cambridge, 1995; M.Eng.,1996; M.A. (Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering); M.A.  (Engineering), Princeton University,  1999; Ph.D., 2003. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2006-11; Professor, 2011-17;  von Karman Professor, 2017-; Associ -ate Director, 2012-17; Division Deputy  Chair, 2020-. Carver Mead, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c., D.h.c. Gordon and Betty Moore Professor  of Engineering and Applied Science, Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1956; M.S., 1957; Ph.D., 1960; D.Sc.h.c., University of Lund (Sweden); D.h.c., University of South-ern California. Instructor in Electrical  Engineering, Caltech, 1958-59; Assis-tant Professor, 1959-62; Associate Pro -fessor, 1962-67; Professor, 1967-77;  Professor of Computer Science and  Electrical Engineering, 1977-80; Moore  Professor of Computer Science, 1980- 92; Moore Professor of Engineering  and Applied Science, 1992-99; Moore  Professor Emeritus, 1999-. Simona Mei Visiting Associate in Astronomy  Ph.D., University of Strasbourg, 1999.  Professor, University of Paris, 2006-.  Caltech, 2008-13; 2016-22.David L Meier Visiting Associate in Astronomy  Ph.D., University of Texas, Austin,  1977.  Caltech, 2014-20.Daniel I (Dan) Meiron, Ph.D.  Fletcher Jones Professor of Aeronau -tics and Applied and Computational Mathematics S.B., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1976; Sc.D., 1981. Re -search Fellow in Applied Mathematics,  Caltech, 1981-83; Visiting Associate,  1984-85; Assistant Professor, 1985-89;  Associate Professor, 1989-94; Profes -sor, 1994-2000; Professor of Applied  and Computational Mathematics, 2000; Professor of Applied and Com -putational Mathematics and Computer Science, 2001-06; Jones Professor of  Applied and Computational Mathemat-ics and Computer Science, 2006-09. Jones Professor, 2009-;Executive  Officer for Applied Mathematics, 1994- 98; Associate Provost for Information  and Information Technology, 2000-04.  Associate Director, 2009-12. Markus Meister, Ph.D.  Anne P. and Benjamin F. Biaggini Pro -fessor of Biological Sciences Dipl., Technische Universitat Munchen,  1980; Ph.D., Caltech, 1987. Moore  Distinguished Scholar, Caltech, 2004;  Professor, 2012-13; Hanson Professor,  2013-15; Biaggini Professor, 2015-;  Executive Officer, 2017-20. Michael Mello Teaching Professor of Mechanical and  Civil Engineering B.S., Bridgewater State College, 1985; M.S., University of Rochester,  1988; Ph.D., Caltech, 2012.  Lecturer  in Mechanical and Civil Engineering, 2014-2020; Teaching Professor of Me -chanical and Civil Engineering, 2020-.818Trustees, Administration, Faculty\Trustees, Administration, Faculty   Lecturer in Chemistry  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  1999; Ph.D., 2008.  Caltech, 2013-21.Massimo Meneghetti Visiting Associate in Physics  M.S., University of Padua, 1999; Ph.D., 2003. Caltech, 2018-21.Trevor C Merrill  Lecturer in French  B.A., Yale University, 2000; Ph.D.,  University of California, Los Angeles,  2011.  Caltech, 2012-13; 2014-21.Richard A Mewaldt  Research Professor of Physics  B.A., Lawrence University, 1965; M.A.,  Washington University (St.Louise),  1967; Ph.D., 1971. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1971-75; Senior Research  Fellow, 1975-81; Lecturer, 1987; Re -search Professor, 1981-. Victoria F Meyer  Lecturer in Engineering  B.S., University of Bordeaux, 2008;  M.S., EGID Institute, Bordeaux, 2010;  Ph.D., Paul Sabatier University, 2017.  Caltech, 2021.Elliot Meyerowitz, Ph.D., D.h.c.,  D.Sc.h.c. George W. Beadle Professor of  Biology; Investigator, Howard Hughes  Medical Institute A.B., Columbia University, 1973;  M.Phil., Yale University, 1975;  Ph.D., 1977; D.h.c., École Normale Supérieure; D.Sc.h.c., Yale University.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1980-85;  Associate Professor, 1985-89; Pro -fessor, 1989-2002; Beadle Professor,  2002-; HHMI Investigator, 2013-; Exec -utive Officer, 1995-2000; Chair, Division  of Biology, 2000-10. Charles E Miller Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering B.S., Duke University, 1986; Ph.D.,  University of California, Berkeley, 1991.  Caltech, 2012-14; 2016-21.Thomas F (Tom) Miller, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemistry  B.S., Texas A&M University, 2000;  Ph.D., University of Oxford, 2005.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2008-13;  Professor 2013-. Feng-Ying Ming  Lecturer in Chinese, B.A., Tamkang  University (Taiwan), 1978  M.A., California State University, 1984;  M.A., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1991; Ph.D., 1999. Caltech, 2000-.Austin J Minnich, Ph.D. Professor of Mechanical Engineering  and Applied Physics B.S., University of California, Berkeley,  2006; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2008; Ph.D., 2011.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2011-17,  Professor, 2017-. Mohammad Mirhosseini, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Electrical Engi -neering and Applied Physics B.S., University of Tehran, 2010; M.S.,  University of Rochester, 2013; Ph.D.,  2015. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2020; Assistant Professor, 2020-. Betsy Mitchell Director of Athletics, Physical Educa -tion and Recreation  M.A., University of Texas (Austin),  1991; B.S., 1998. Caltech, 2011-.Eric D Mjolsness Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering A.B., Washington University, 1980;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1985. Principal Com-puter Scientist, Jet Propulsion Lab -oratory, 1998-; Associate Professor,  University of California (Irvine), 2002- 2009; Professor, University of California  (Irvine), 2009-. Faculty Associate, Caltech, 2000-02; Moore Distinguished  Scholar, 2010-11. Caltech, Visiting  Associate, 2002-10; 2016-21.Dean Mobbs, Ph.D. Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience;  Allen V. C. Davis and Lenabelle Davis  Leadership Chair, Caltech Brain Im -aging Center; Director, Caltech Brain  Imaging Center B.S., University of Birmingham, 1999; Ph.D., University College London, 2008. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2016-20; Professor, 2020-; Chen  Scholar, 2019-21; Davis Leadership  Chair, 2021-; Director, 2021-. Sergey Morozov  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  Ph.D., South Ural State University,  1998.  Caltech, 2020-21.Derrick J Morton Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Eastern Kentucky University,  2009; Ph.D., Clark Atlanta University,  2016.  Caltech, 2020-22.819Historical SketchZ819Officers and Faculty 820Trustees, Administration, Faculty,Hossein Mosallaei Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science Ph.D., University of California Los  Angeles, 2001. Caltech, 2017-21.Olexei I Motrunich, Ph.D. Professor of Theoretical Physics  B.S., University of Missouri (Columbia), 1996; Ph.D., Princeton University,  2001. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2006-12; Professor, 2012-. Duane O Muhleman, Ph.D. Professor of Planetary Science,  Emeritus B.S., University of Toledo, 1953; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1963. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1967-71; Professor,  1971-97; Professor Emeritus, 1997-.  Staff Member, Owens Valley Radio  Observatory, 1967-. Dana M Murphy, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of English and  Black Studies B.A., University of California, Berkeley,  2011; M.A., University of California,  Irvine, 2015; Ph.D, 2018. Caltech, Assistant Professor, 2021-. Richard M Murray, Ph.D.  Thomas E. and Doris Everhart Profes -sor of Control and Dynamical Systems  and Bioengineering; William K. Bowes Jr. Leadership Chair, Division of Biology  and Biological Engineering B.S., Caltech, 1985; M.S., University of California, Berkeley, 1988; Ph.D., 1990.  Assistant Professor of Mechanical En -gineering, Caltech, 1991-97; Associate Professor, 1997-2000; Professor, 2000- 05; Professor of Control and Dynamical  Systems, 2005-06; Everhart Professor  of Control and Dynamical Systems;  2006-09; Everhart Professor of Control  and Dynamical Systems and Bioengi-neering, 2009-. Chair, Engineering and  Applied Science, 2000-05; Director,  Information Science and Technology,  2006-2009; Interim Chair, Engineering  and Applied Science, 2008-09; Division Chair, 2020-; Bowes Jr. Leadership  Chair, 2020-. Hillary Mushkin Research Professor of Art and Design  in Engineering and Applied Science and the Humanities and Social Sci-ences B.F.A., Rhode Island School of Design,  1991; M.F.A., University of California,  Irvine, 1994. Caltech, 2011-.Stevan Nadj-Perge, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Applied Physics  and Materials Science M.S., Belgrade University, 2006; Ph.D.,  Delft University of Technology, 2010.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2015;  Assistant Professor, 2016-. Vijay Natraj  Visiting Associate in Planetary Sciences  B.E., National University of Singapore,  1998; M.S. California Institute of Tech -nology, 2004; Ph.D., 2008; Caltech,  2020-23.Ken Nealson Visiting Associate in Geobiology  B.S., University of Chicago, 1965; M.S., 1966; Ph.D., 1969.  Faculty As-sociate, Caltech, 1998-2001; Lecturer  in Environmental Engineering Science,  1998-99; 2000; Lecturer in Geological  and Planetary Sciences, 1998; Visiting  Associate, 2021- 2023.Thomas A Neenan Lecturer in Music  B.F.A., California State University  (Northridge), 1977; M.F.A., University of  California (Los Angeles), 1982. Caltech,  1991-98; 1998-.Hosea M Nelson, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry  B.S., University of California, Berkeley,  2005; Ph.D., California Institute of  Technology, 2013.  Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2021; Professor, 2021-. Paul S Nerenberg  Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.S., Johns Hopkins University, 2004;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2010.  Caltech, 2014-21. Dianne K Newman, Ph.D. Gordon M. Binder/Amgen Professor  of Biology and Geobiology; Executive Officer for Biology and Biological  Engineering B.A., Stanford University, 1993; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technolo -gy, 1997. Clare Booth Luce Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2000-05; Associate  Professor, 2005-06; Professor, 2006- 16; HHMI Investigator, 2005-16;  Binder/Amgen Professor, 2016-; Davis  Leadership Chair, 2017-20; Executive  Officer, 2017-. Harvey B Newman, Sc.D., D.h.c. Marvin L. Goldberger Professor of  Physics B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1968; Sc.D., 1973; D.h.c., Uni -versity Politehnica of Bucharest; Pavol  Trustees, Administration, Faculty Jozef Safarik University. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1982-90; Professor,  1990-17; Goldberger Professor, 2017-. Hien T Nguyen Visiting Associate in Physics  Ph.D., Princeton University, 1993.  Research Scientist, Jet Propulsion  Laboratory, 2002-. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2007-20; Lecturer, 2007;  2008; 2009; 2014; 2015-22.Yi Ni, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics  B.S., Peking University, 2001; M.S.,  2003; Ph.D., Princeton University,  2007. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2009-15; Professor, 2015-. Marc A Nicolet, Ph.D.  Professor of Electrical Engineering and  Applied Physics, Emeritus Ph.D., University of Basel, 1958. Assis-tant Professor of Electrical Engineering,  Caltech, 1959-65; Associate Professor,  1965-73; Professor, 1973-88; Professor  of Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics, 1988-98; Professor Emeritus,  1998-.Kirby K Nielsen, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Economics;  William H. Hurt Scholar B.A., Rice University, 2013; M.A., Ohio  State University, 2014; Ph.D, 2018.  Caltech, 2020-; Hurt Scholar, 2021-. Gunter Niemeyer Lecturer in Mechanical and Civil  Engineering B.A., RWTH Aachen University, 1986;  M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1990; Ph.D., 1996. Visiting  Associate, 2018-19. Caltech, 2020-22.Shouleh Nikzad Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., University of Southern California,  1982; M.S., Caltech, 1983; Ph.D., 1983. Staff, Jet Propulsion Laborato -ry, 1992-. Research Fellow, Caltech,  1990-91; Visiting Associate, 1992-96;  2012-21.; Lecturer, 2016-17; 2019-23. Barbara B Oberg Visiting Associate in History  B.A., Wellesley College, 1964; M.A.,  University of California (Santa Barbara),  1967, Ph.D., 1974. Caltech, 2016; 2017; 2018; 2019-22.Roger C O'Brient Visiting Associate in Experimental  Physics B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2001, M.A., University of California,  Berkeley, 2005; Ph.D., 2010. Caltech,  2015-20.John P O'Doherty, Ph.D.  Professor of Psychology  B.A., University of Dublin (Trinity  College), 1996; D.Phil., University of Oxford, 2000. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2004-07; Associate Professor,  2007-09; Professor, 2009-; Director,  Caltech Brain Imaging Center, 2013- 17.Hiroshi (Hirosi Ooguri) Oguri  Fred Kavli Professor of Theoretical  Physics and Mathematics; Director,  Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical  Physics B.A., Kyoto University (Japan), 1984; M.A., 1986; Ph.D., University of Tokyo,  1989. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  1999-2000; Professor, 2000-07; Kavli  Professor, 2007-; Deputy Chair, 2010- 15; Director, 2014-. Yuki Oka, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology and Chen Scholar;   Investigator, Heritage Medical Re -search Institute  B.A., The University of Tokyo, 2002;  Ph.D., 2007. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2014-20; Professor, 2020-;  Chen Scholar, 2019-; HMRI Investiga -tor, 2021-. Mitchio Okumura, Ph.D. Professor of Chemical Physics  B.S., Yale University, 1979; M.S., 1979;  C.P.G.S., University of Cambridge,  1980; Ph.D., University of California,  1986. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1988-94; Associate Professor, 1994- 2003; Professor, 2003-. Executive  Officer, 2006-10. Alison E Ondrus, Ph.D. Research Assistant Professor of  Chemistry B.Sc., University of Alberta, 2003; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2009. Caltech, 2017-. Christiane H Orcel  Lecturer in French  M.A., Princeton University, 1987; Ph.D.,  1992. Instructor, Caltech, 1990-93;  Lecturer, 1993-95; 1995-. Peter C Ordeshook, Ph.D.  Professor of Political Science  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1964; Ph.D., University of  Rochester, 1969. Professor, Caltech,  1987-2009, 2013-; Harkness Professor,  2009-13. Executive Officer for the  Social Sciences, 1992-95.821Historical Sketch^821Officers and Faculty Victoria J Orphan, Ph.D.  James Irvine Professor of Environmen -tal Science and Geobiology; Allen V. C.  Davis and Lenabelle Davis Leadership Chair, Center for Environmental Micro -bial Interactions; Director, Center for  Environmental Microbial Interactions  B.A., University of California (Santa  Barbara), 1994; Ph.D., 2002. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2004-2010;  Associate Professor, 2010; Professor,  2010-16; James Irvine Professor,  2016-; Davis Leadership Chair, 2020-;  Director, 2020-. Michael Ortiz, Ph.D. Frank and Ora Lee Marble Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engineer -ing, Emeritus B.S., Polytechnic University of Madrid, 1977; M.S., University of California,  1978; Ph.D., 1982. Sherman Fairchild  Distinguished Scholar, Caltech, 1994- 95; Professor of Aeronautics and Ap -plied Mechanics, 1995-2000; Professor  of Aeronautics and Mechanical Engi -neering, 2000-04; Hayman Professor,  2004-13; Marble Professor, 2013-20;  Marble Professor, Emeritus, 2020-. Houman Owhadi, Ph.D. Professor of Applied and Computa -tional Mathematics and Control and  Dynamical Systems B.S., Ecole Polytechnique (France), 1994; M.S., Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussees, 1997; Ph.D., Ecole Poly-technique Federale de Lausanne (Swit-zerland), 2001. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2004-11; Professor, 2011-. Lior S Pachter, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Computational Biol -ogy and Computing and Mathematical Sciences B.S., California Institute of Technology,  1994; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1999. Bren Professor,  Caltech, 2017-.Stephen Padin Research Professor of Physics  B.Sc, University of Manchester, 1982;  Ph.D, 1985. Caltech, 2009-.Oskar J Painter, Ph.D.  John G Braun Professor of Applied  Physics and Physics B.S., University of British Columbia, 1994; M.S., Caltech, 1995; Ph.D., 2001. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2001-02; Assistant Professor, 2002- 08; Associate Professor, 2008-10;  Professor, 2010-13; Braun Professor,  2013-; Executive Officer, 2010-13,  2019; Co-Director, Kavli Nanoscience  Institute, 2011-13, 2015-19.Thomas R Palfrey, Ph.D.  Flintridge Foundation Professor of  Economics and Political Science B.A., University of Michigan, 1975; M.A., 1976; Ph.D., Caltech, 1981. Professor, 1986-2002; Flintridge  Foundation Professor, 2003-05; 2006-.  Executive Officer for the Social Scienc -es, 2001-02.Dimitra Panagou Visiting Associate in Mechanical and  Civil Engineering Ph.D., National Technical University of  Athens, 2012. Caltech, 2020-21.D A (Dimitri) Papanastassiou Visiting Associate in Geochemistry  B.S. Caltech, 1965; Ph.D., 1970. Research Fellow in Physics, 1970-72;  Senior Research Fellow in Planetary  Science, 1972-76; Research Associate  in Geochemistry, 1976-81; Senior  Research Associate, 1981-99; Faculty  Associate, 1999-2017; Visiting Associ -ate, 2017-22.Michele Papucci Research Professor of Theoretical  Physics B.S., University of Pisa, 2001; M.S., Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, 2002;  Ph.D., Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa,  2009. Caltech 2019 -.Sarthak Parikh Olga Taussky and John Todd Instructor  in Mathematics University, 2014; Ph.D., 2017. Caltech,  2017-2020.Jiewon Park Taussky Todd Instructor in Mathematics  B.S., Seoul National University, 2015;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2020. Caltech 2020-23. Carl S Parker, Ph.D.  Professor of Biochemistry  B.A., University of Rochester, 1973;  Ph.D., Washington University (St.  Louis), 1977. Assistant Professor of  Chemical Biology, Caltech, 1981-87;  Associate Professor, 1987-92; Profes -sor, 1992-99; Professor of Biochemis -try, 1999-. Executive Officer, 2000-04. Joseph Parker, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.S., Imperial College London, 2001; Ph.D. University of Cambridge, 2005. 822Trustees, Administration, Faculty,Trustees, Administration, Faculty 823Historical SketchVisiting Associate, Caltech, 2017;  Assistant Professor, 2017-. Alina Patke Visiting Associate in Biology  B.S., Free University of Berlin, 1998;  M.Sc., 2001; Ph.D., Humboldt Univer-sity, 2007.  Caltech, 2018-21. Ryan B Patterson, Ph.D. Professor of Physics  B.S., Caltech, 2000; Ph.D., Princeton University, 2007. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2010-17; Professor, 2017-. Volnei A (Pedroni) Pedroni  Lecturer in Electrical Engineering  B.S., Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 1975; M.S., Caltech, 1990; Ph.D., 1995. Professor, Federal Uni -versity of Technology, 1976-. Visiting  Professor, 2008; 2011; 2013, 2015-20;  Lecturer; 2021. Sergio Pellegrino, Ph.D. Joyce and Kent Kresa Professor of  Aerospace and Civil Engineering; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist; Co-Director, Space-based  Solar Power Project  Laurea, University of Naples, 1982;  Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 1986. Professor, Caltech, 2007-2010;  Kresa Professor, 2010-; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Senior Research Scientist,  2009-; Co-Director, 2016-. Leora Peltz Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of Negev, 1975; B.S.,  1976; M.S., Case Western Reserve  University, 1995; Ph.D., 2005.  Scien -tist, Boeing, 2003-. Caltech, 2007-13; 2014-21.Pietro Perona, Ph.D.  Allen E. Puckett Professor of Electrical  Engineering D.Eng., University of Padua (Italy), 1985; Ph.D., University of California,  Berkeley, 1990. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1991-96; Professor, 1996- 2008; Puckett Professor, 2008-. Direc -tor, Center for Neuromorphic Systems  Engineering, 1999-2004. Executive Officer, 2006-10. Isabelle S Peter Lashgari Faghani Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering Ph.D., University of Zurich, 2002. Caltech, 2011-.Jonas C Peters, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Chemistry; Director,  Resnick Sustainability Institute B.S., University of Chicago, 1993; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 1998. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1999-2004; Associate Profes -sor, 2004-06; Professor, 2006-09; Bren  Professor, 2010-; Executive Officer,  2013-15; Director, Resnick Sustainabil -ity Institute, 2015-.Peter A Petillo Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of New Hampshire-  Durham, 1985; Ph.D., University of Wisconsin- Madison, 1991. Caltech, 2016-2021.Danny Petrasek Visiting Associate in Medical Engi -neering B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1980; M.D., Chicago Medical School, 1985; Ph.D., Caltech, 2002. Clinical Professor, University of Califor -nia (Los Angeles) School of Medicine, 2004-. Senior Research Fellow in Ap -plied and Computational Mathematics and Bioengineering, 2002-08; Lecturer  in Biology and Biological Engineering, 2005-11, 2013; 2014; 2016; 2017; 2018. Visiting Associate, Applied and  Computational Mathematics and Bioengineering, 2008-13.  Lecturer  in Medical Engineering, 2004-2020. Visiting Associate, Medical Engineer -ing, 2013-22.Adam K Pham Howard E. and Susanne C. Jessen  Postdoctoral Instructor in Philosophy B.S., Kansas State University, Man -hattan, 2010; M.A., University of Wis-consin, Madison, 2013; Ph.D., 2020. Caltech, 2020 - 22.Rob Phillips , Ph.D. Fred and Nancy Morris Professor of  Biophysics, Biology, and Physics  B.S., University of Minnesota, 1986; Ph.D., Washington University, 1989.  Clark Millikan Visiting Assistant Pro -fessor, Caltech, 1997; Professor, 2000- 2011; Morris Professor, 2012-. Thomas G Phillips, Ph.D., D.h.c. John D. MacArthur Professor of Phys -ics, Emeritus B.A., University of Oxford, 1961; M.A.,  1964; Ph.D., 1964; D.h.c., l'Obser-vatoire de Paris. Visiting Associate in  Radio Astronomy, Caltech, 1978-79;  Professor of Physics, 1979-2004. Altair  823Officers and Faculty 824Trustees, Administration, FacultybProfessor, 2004-11. MacArthur Profes -sor, 2011-2013; MacArthur Professor,  Emeritus, 2013-; Staff Member, Owens  Valley Radio Observatory, 1978-85;  Associate Director, Owens Valley  Radio Observatory, 1981-85; Director,  Caltech Submillimeter Observatory,  1986-2013.E S (Sterl) Phinney, Ph.D.  Professor of Theoretical Astrophysics  B.S., Caltech, 1980; Ph.D., Univer-sity of Cambridge, 1983. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1985-91; Associate  Professor, 1991-95; Professor, 1995-;  Executive Officer, 2013-16. Niles A Pierce, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied and  Computational Mathematics and Bioengineering, Executive Officer for  Biology and Biological Engineering B.S.E., Princeton University, 1993;  D.Phil., University of Oxford, 1997.  Assistant Professor of Applied  Mathematics, Caltech, 2000; Assistant Professor of Applied and  Computational Mathematics, 2000-04; Assistant Professor of Applied and  Computational Mathematics and Bioengineering, 2004-06; Associate Professor, 2006-10; Professor,  2010-; Acting Executive Officer for  Bioengineering, 2007; Executive Officer  for Bioengineering, 2007-13; Executive Officer for Biological Engineering,  2013; Executive Officer, 2020-. George Pigman, Ph.D. Professor of English  A.B., Harvard College, 1973; M.Phil.,  Yale University, 1975; Ph.D. (Compara -tive Literature), 1977; Ph.D., (Psycho -analysis), Southern California Psy -choanalytic Institute, 1989. Assistant Professor of English, Caltech, 1977-80;  Assistant Professor of Literature, 1980- 83; Associate Professor, 1983-93;  Professor of Literature, 1993-2004;  Professor of English, 2004-. Executive  Officer for the Humanities, 2003-08. Donald H (Donnie) Pinkston Schmidt Software Academy Instructor  B.S., Caltech, 1998. Lecturer, 2005- 2021; Instructor, 2019-22. Charles R Plott, Ph.D., D.Lit.h.c., D.h.c. William D. Hacker Professor of Eco -nomics and Political Science B.S., Oklahoma State University, 1961;  M.S., 1964; Ph.D., University of Virgin -ia, 1965; D.Lit.h.c., Purdue University;  D.h.c., Universite Pierre Mendes.  Professor of Economics, Caltech,  1971-87; Harkness Professor, 1987- 2013; Hacker Professor, 2013-. Hugh D (David) Politzer Nobel Laureate, Ph.D., Richard Chace  Tolman Professor of Theoretical  Physics B.S., University of Michigan, 1969; Ph.D., Harvard University, 1974. Visit -ing Associate, Caltech, 1975-76; As-sociate Professor, 1977-79; Professor,  1979-2004; Tolman Professor, 2004-.  Executive Officer for Physics, 1986-88. James E (Jay) Polk Lecturer in Aerospace  B.S., Georgia Institute of Technolo -gy, 1984; M.S., Princeton University,  1986; Ph.D., 1996.  Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2007-12; Lecturer, 1999-2002;  2005-08; 2010-21.Luciano Pomatto, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Economics  B.A., Universita di Torino, 2007; M.A.,  2009; Ph.D., Northwestern University,  2015. Caltech, 2016-.Frank C Porter, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics  B.S., Caltech, 1972; Ph.D., University of California, 1977. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1977-78; Weizmann Research  Fellow, 1978-80; Senior Research  Fellow, 1980-82; Assistant Professor,  1982-88; Associate Professor, 1988- 94; Professor, 1994-. Mohammad Farzad (Farzad) Pourbabaee Postdoctoral Instructor in Economic Theory B.S., Sharif University of Technology,  2013; M.S., McMaster University, 2015;  M.S., University of California, Berkeley,  2021; Ph.D, 2021.  Caltech, 2021-23.John P Preskill, Ph.D.  Richard P. Feynman Professor of Theo -retical Physics; Allen V. C. Davis and Len -abelle Davis Leadership Chair, Institute  for Quantum Science and Technology  A.B., Princeton University, 1975; A.M.,  Harvard University, 1976; Ph.D., 1980.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 1983-90;  Professor, 1990-2002; MacArthur  Professor, 2002-09; Feynman Professor,  2010-; Davis Leadership Chair, Institute  for Quantum Science and Technology,  2017-.Glenn Price Band Director and Director of Perform -ing and Visual Arts  B.S., University of Toronto, 1977; M.S.,  Trustees, Administration, Faculty University of Rochester, 1981; Ph.D.,  1986.  Caltech, 2016-.Thomas A (Tom) Prince, Ph.D.  Ira S. Bowen Professor of Physics,  Emeritus; Allen V. C. Davis and Len -abelle Davis Leadership Chair, Keck  Institute for Space Studies; Director, W.  M. Keck Institute for Space Studies B.S., Villanova University, 1970; M.S.,  University of Chicago, 1972; Ph.D., 1978. Research Fellow, Caltech, 1979- 80; Robert A. Millikan Research Fellow,  1980-82; Senior Research Fellow,  1982-83; Assistant Professor, 1983-86;  Associate Professor, 1986-92; Profes -sor, 1992-16; Bowen Professor, 2017- 21; Bowen Professor, Emeritus, 2021-;  Davis Leadership Chair, Keck Institute  for Space Studies, 2017-; Associate Director for Advanced Computer  Research, 1995-2001; Director, Keck  Institute, 2008-; Chief Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 2001-06; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist, 2006-21; Deputy Executive Officer, 2013-16. David Prober, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology  B.Sc., University of Manitoba, 1995; Ph.D., University of Washington, 2002.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2009- 2017; Professor, 2017-. Carmie Puckett Robinson Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Michigan State University, 1970;  M.D., 1975. Professor, University of  Southern California, 2000-. Senior  Research Fellow, Caltech, 1986-1992;  Visiting Associate, 2006-09, 2010-22. Dale I Pullin, Ph.D. Robert H. Goddard Professor of  Aeronautics  B.Sc., University of Melbourne, 1966;  B.E., University of Sydney, 1968; Ph.D.,  University of London (Imperial College), 1974. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  1990; Professor, 1991-2006, von Kar -man Professor, 2006-2017; Goddard  Professor, 2017-. Elizabeth Y Qian von Karman Instructor in Computing and Mathematical Sciences B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2014; M.S., 2017; Ph.D., 2021.  Caltech, 2021-22Lulu Qian, Ph.D. Professor of Bioengineering  B.E., Southeast University, 2002;  Ph.D., Shanghai Jiao Tong University,  2007. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  2013-18; Professor, 2019-. Steven R Quartz, Ph.D. Professor of Philosophy  B.A., University of Western Ontario  (Huron College), 1986; M.A., 1988;  Ph.D., University of California (San  Diego), 1993. Instructor, Caltech,  1998-99; Assistant Professor, 1999- 2002; Associate Professor, 2002-10;  Professor, 2010-. Maksym Radziwill, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  B.Sc., McGill University, 2009; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 2013; Caltech,  2018-.Eric M Rains, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  Executive Officer for Mathematics,  B.A., Case Western Reserve University,  1991; B.S., 1991; M.S., 1991; Ph.D., Harvard University, 1995.  Visiting  Associate and Lecturer, Caltech, 2002;  Professor, 2007-; Executive Officer,  2019-.Aditya Rajagopal Visiting Associate in Electrical Engi -neering B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2008; M.S., 2010; Ph.D., 2014. Caltech,  2017-21.Claire C Ralph  Lecturer in Computing and Mathemat -ical Sciences B.S., University of New Mexico, Albu-querque, 2007; M.S., Cornell Universi -ty, 2011. Caltech, 2018-2021. Dinakar Ramakrishnan, Ph.D. Taussky-Todd-Lonergan Professor of  Mathematics Ph.D., Columbia University, 1980.   Professor, Caltech, 1988-2007; Tauss -ky-Todd-Lonergan Professor, 2007-;  Executive Officer, 2013-16. Anamparambu N (Ram) Ramaprakash Visiting Associate in Astronomy  Btech, Technical University of Munich,  1992, Ph.D., University of Pune, 1999. Caltech 2015-21.Michael Ramsey-Musolf Visiting Associate in Physics  Ph.D., Princeton University, 1989.  Professor, University of Wisconsin  (Madison), 2007-. Visiting Associ -ate, Caltech, 2001; 2007-22; Senior Research Associate, 2001-07; Lecturer,  2005-06.825Historical Sketcha825Officers and Faculty Lisa Ruth Rand, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of History  B.A., Barnard College, 2005; M.A., Uni -versity of Pennsylvania, 2011; Ph.D., 2016. Caltech, 2021-.Antonio Rangel, Ph.D. Bing Professor of Neuroscience, Be -havioral Biology, and Economics; Head  Faculty in Residence B.Sc., Caltech, 1993; M.S., Har-vard University, 1996; Ph.D., 1998.  Instructor, Caltech, 1997-98; Visiting  Associate, 2005-06; Associate Pro -fessor, 2006-10; Professor, 2010-13;  Bing Professor, 2013-; Head Faculty in  Residence, 2018-.Vikram Ravi, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Astronomy  B.S., Australian National University,  2009;  Ph.D., University of Melbourne,  2014. Visiting Associate, Caltech 2018- 19; Assistant Professor, 2019-. Guruswami (Ravi) Ravichandran, Ph.D., D.h.c. John E. Goode, Jr., Professor of Aero -space and Mechanical Engineering B.E., University of Madras (Regional Engineering College), 1981; Sc.M. (Solid Mechanics and Structures),  Brown University, 1983; Sc.M. (Applied  Mathematics), 1984; Ph.D., 1987; D.h.c., Paul Verlaine University. Assis -tant Professor, Caltech, 1990-95; As -sociate Professor, 1995-99; Professor,  1999-2005; Goode Professor, 2005-;  Associate Director, 2008-09; Director,  Graduate Aerospace Laboratories,  2009-15; Division Chair, 2015-21; Otis  Booth Leadership Chair, 2015-21. Animesh Ray Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering Ph.D., Monash University, 1984.  Caltech, 2016-22.Anthony C Readhead, Ph.D. Robinson Professor of Astronomy,  Emeritus B.Sc., University of Witwatersrand (South Africa), 1968; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 1972. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1974-75; Senior Research  Fellow, 1976-79; Research Associate,  1979-81; Professor of Radio Astron -omy, 1981-90; Professor of Astron -omy, 1990-2000; Rawn Professor,  2000-13; Robinson Professor, 2013-15;  Robinson Professor, Emeritus, 2015-;  Director, Owens Valley Radio Obser -vatory, 1981-86, 2007-18; Executive  Officer for Astronomy, 1990-92, 2012- 13; Director, Chajnantor Observatory,  2006-2011; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Senior Research Scientist, 2006-15. Carol W Readhead  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.Sc., University of  Witwatersrand (South Africa), 1969; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 1976. Research Fellow  in Biology, Caltech, 1977-79; Senior  Research Fellow, 1980-83; Senior  Research Associate, 1998-2002; Lec -turer in Engineering, 2006-17; Visiting  Associate, 2011-15; 2017-22.Douglas C (Doug) Rees Ph.D., Roscoe Gilkey Dickinson Profes -sor of Chemistry; Investigator, Howard  Hughes Medical Institute B.S., Yale University, 1974; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1980. Professor,  Caltech, 1989-2004; Dickinson Profes -sor, 2004-. HHMI Investigator, 1997-;  Executive Officer for Chemistry, 2002- 06; Executive Officer for Biochemistry  and Molecular Biophysics, 2007-15; Dean of Graduate Studies, 2015-20.Gil Refael, Ph.D. Taylor W. Lawrence Professor of Theo -retical Physics  B.S.,Tel Aviv University, 1997; M.S.,  1998; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2003.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2005- 2008; Associate Professor, 2008-11;  Professor, 2011-17; Lawrence Profes -sor, 2017-; Executive Officer, 2014-20. Sarah E Reisman, Ph.D. Bren Professor of Chemistry  B.A., Connecticut College, 2001; Ph.D., Yale University, 2006. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2008-14; Professor,  2014-20; Bren Professor, 2020-; HMRI  Investigator 2015-21; Executive Officer,  2015-21.David H Reitze Research Professor of Physics; Execu -tive Director of the LIGO Project  B.A., Northwestern University, 1983;  Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin),  1993. Professor, University of Florida,  1998-. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  1996-97; 2000; 2003; 2007-11; Senior Research Associate, 2011-16; Execu -tive Director, 2011-. Robert C Ritchie Visiting Associate in History  A.B., Occidental College, 1960; Ph.D., University of California (Los Angeles),  1970. W. M. Keck Foundation Director  of Research, Huntington Library and  826Trustees, Administration, FacultyeTrustees, Administration, Faculty 827Historical SketchuArt Gallery, 1992-. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 1993-21; Lecturer, 1995;  1997; 1999; 2001; 2005.Maxwell J Robb, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Chemistry  B.S., Colorado School of Mines, 2009; Ph.D., University of California, Santa  Barbara, 2014. Caltech, 2017-.Graca M Rocha Visiting Associate in Physics  M.S., London University, 1992; Ph.D.,  University of Cambridge, 1997; Visiting  Associate in Physics, Caltech, 2016-21.Jennifer L Rodgers Research Assistant Professor of History  B.A., American University, 1998; M. A.,  University of Pennsylvania, 2010; Ph.D. 2014,  Caltech, 2019-.Sandy Rodriguez Lecturer in Visual Culture  B.F.A., California Institute of the Arts,  1997. Caltech 2020.Chris Roh Lecturer in Medical Engineering  B.S., Cornell University, 2012; M.S.,  Caltech, 2013; Ph.D., 2017. Caltech, 2019; 2020; 2021.Richard W Roll, Ph.D.  Linde Institute Professor of Finance  B.A.E., Auburn University, 1961;  M.B.A., University of Washington,  1963; Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1968. Caltech, Linde Institute Profes -sor, 2013-. Andrew Romero-Wolf  Visiting Associate in Astronomy  B.S., University of Chicago, 2002; M.S., University of Chicago, 2005; Ph.D., University of Hawaii, 2010. Caltech 2019-22.Alton D Romig Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science Ph.D., Lehigh University, 1979.   Caltech, 2013-21.Ares J Rosakis, Ph.D.  Theodore von Karman Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engi -neering B.Sc., University of Oxford, 1978;  Sc.M., Brown University, 1980; Ph.D.,  1982. Assistant Professor of Aeronau -tics and Applied Mechanics, Caltech, 1982-88; Associate Professor, 1988- 93; Professor, 1993-2000; Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engineer -ing, 2000-04; von Karman Professor,  2004-; Director, Graduate Aerospace  Laboratories, 2004-09; Division Chair,  2009-13; Otis Booth Leadership Chair,  2013-15.Phoebus Rosakis Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., Brown University, 1983; M.S.,  Caltech, 1984; Ph.D., 1989.  Caltech, 2011-21.Paul A Rosen Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.S., University of Pennsylvania, 1981; M.S., 1982; Ph.D., Stanford University,  1989. Technical Group Supervisor, Jet  Propulsion Laboratory, 1992-. Lecturer,  2000-03; 2005-2008; Visiting Associ -ate, Caltech, 1998-2022.Robert A Rosenstone, Ph.D. Professor of History, Emeritus  B.A., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1957; Ph.D., 1965. Visiting  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1966-68;  Assistant Professor, 1968-69; Asso -ciate Professor, 1969-75; Professor,  1975-2012; Professor Emeritus, 2012-.  Executive Officer for the Humanities,  1983-86.Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Ph.D.  Rea A. and Lela G. Axline Professor of  Business Economics; Ronald and Max-ine Linde Leadership Chair, Division of  the Humanities and Social Sciences B.A., Reed College, 1984; Ph.D., Caltech, 1988. Professor of Econom -ics, 2006-2008; Axline Professor of  Business Economics, 2008-; Executive Officer, 2007-13; Division Chair, 2014-;  Linde Leadership Chair, 2016-. Zachary E Ross, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Geophysics;  William H. Hurt Scholar B.S., University of California, Davis,  2009; M.S., California Polytechnic  State University, San Luis Obispo,  2011; Ph.D., University of Southern  California, 2016. Caltech, 2019-; Hurt  Scholar, 2021-. George R Rossman, Ph.D. Professor of Mineralogy  B.S., Wisconsin State University, 1966;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1971. Instructor, 1971;  Assistant Professor, 1971-77; Asso -ciate Professor, 1977-83; Professor,  1983-2008; 2015-. McMillan Professor,  2008-15. Divisional Academic Officer  for Geological and Planetary Sciences, 1999-2008.827Officers and Faculty 828Trustees, Administration, FacultygPaul W Rothemund Research Professor of Bioengineer -ing, Computing and Mathematical Sciences, and Computation and Neural Systems B.S., Caltech, 1994; Ph.D., University of Southern California, 2001. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2001; Beckman Senior Research Fellow, 2001-04;  Senior Research Fellow, Computation  and Neural Systems and Computer Science, 2004-08; Senior Research  Associate, 2008-2015; Research Pro -fessor, 2015-. Ellen Rothenberg, Ph.D. Distinguished Professor of Biology  A.B., Harvard University, 1972; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  1977. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1982-88; Associate Professor, 1988- 94; Professor, 1994-2007; Ruddock  Professor, 2007-21; Distinguished  Professor, 2021-. Michael L Roukes, Ph.D. Frank J. Roshek Professor of Physics,  Applied Physics, and Bioengineering B.A., University of California (Santa  Cruz), 1978; Ph.D., Cornell University,  1985. Associate Professor, Caltech,  1992-96; Professor of Physics, 1996- 2002; Professor of Physics, Applied  Physics, and Bioengineering, 2002-11; Abbey Professor, 2011-17; Roshek  Professor, 2018-; Director, Kavli Nano -science Institute, 2004-06; Co-Director,  2008-2013.Damon S Russell Visiting Associate in Electrical Engi -neering B.S., University of California (Santa  Barbara) 1995; M.S., Santa Clara Uni-versity, 1999; Ph.D., California Institute  of Technology, 2013. Lecturer, 2016,  2017, 2019. Caltech, 2019-21.Jonathan Russin Visiting Associate in Medical Engi -neering B.S., Drew University, 2000; M.A.,  2002. M.D., Rutgers New Jersey Medi-cal School, 2006. Caltech, 2021-2023.Ueli Rutishauser Visiting Associate in Biology and  Bioengineering B.S., University of Applied Sciences, Rapperwil, 2003; Ph.D., California  Institute of Technology, 2008. Caltech,  2013-21.David B Rutledge, Ph.D. Kiyo and Eiko Tomiyasu Professor of  Engineering, Emeritus B.A., Williams College, 1973; M.A., University of Cambridge, 1975; Ph.D., University of California, 1980. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1980-84; Associate  Professor, 1984-89; Professor, 1989- 2001; Tomiyasu Professor, 2001-18;  Tomiyasu Professor, Emeritus, 2018-.  Executive Officer for Electrical Engi -neering, 1999-2002; Chair, Division  of Engineering and Applied Science, 2005-08.John E Sader Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., University of New South Wales,  1989; Ph.D., 1993. Professor, Universi -ty of Melbourne, 2008-. Caltech, 2009;  2010; 2012-21.Kota Saito, Ph.D. Professor of Economics  M.A., University of Tokyo, 2007;  Ph.D., Northwestern University, 2011.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2011-16;  Professor, 2017-. Jason B Saleeby, Ph.D.  Professor of Geology, Emeritus  B.S., California State University  (Northridge), 1972; Ph.D., University of California (Santa Barbara), 1975.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 1978- 88; Professor, 1988-2015; Professor  Emeritus, 2015-.Konrad H Samwer Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science Ph.D., University of Goettingen (Germany), 1981. Professor, 1990-.  Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1981-82;  Visiting Associate, 1987; 1994; 1998- 2000; 2004-05; 2007; 2009-2022.Luis Oscar Sanchez Guardado  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering Ph.D., University of Extremadura,  2007. Caltech, 2021.Stanley P (Stan) Sander Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.A., Pomona College, 1974; M.S., Caltech, 1975; Ph.D.,1980. Senior Research Scientist, Jet Propulsion  Laboratory, 1996-. Visiting Associate  in Planetary Science and Environ -mental Engineering Science, Caltech, 1998-2005; Lecturer in Geology and  Planetary Sciences and Environmental  Engineering Science, 1998-2004, 2017; Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  Trustees, Administration, Faculty829Historical Sketchand Environmental Engineering and  Science, 2005; Visiting Associate in  Planetary Science, 2006-21.Anneila I Sargent, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Ira S. Bowen Professor of Astronomy,  Emeritus B.Sc., University of Edinburgh, 1963;  M.S., Caltech, 1967; Ph.D., 1977; D.Sc.h.c., University of Edinburgh.  Research Fellow, 1977-79; Member of  the Professional Staff, 1979-88; Senior  Research Fellow, 1988-90; Senior Re -search Associate, 1990-98; Professor,  1998-2004, 2016-17; Rosen Professor,  2004-13; Bowen Professor, 2013-16;  Bowen Professor, Emeritus, 2018-;  Associate Director, Owens Valley  Radio Observatory, 1992-96; Executive  Director, 1996-98; Director, 1998-2007;  Director, Interferometry Science Center,  2000-03; Director, Michelson Science  Center, 2003; Vice President, 2007-15. Charlyne B Sarmiento Lecturer in Writing  B.A., San Francisco State University,  2004; M.A., University of Illinois, 2008. Caltech, 2018; 2019; 2020.Mary E Sarotte  Visiting Associate in History  B.A., Harvard University, 1988, M.A.,  Yale University, 1988; Ph.D., 1999.  Caltech, 2019-21.Jonathan Sauder Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.A., Bradley University, 2009; M.S.,  University of Southern California, 2011;  Ph.D., 2013. Caltech, 2020-22.Tilman Sauer Visiting Associate in History  Dipl., Free University (Berlin), 1990;  Ph.D., 1994. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2001-03; Senior Research  Fellow, 2003-05; Senior Research  Associate, 2005-; Lecturer, 2006; 2008;  2009. Caltech, 2018-21.Jack Sayers Research Professor of Physics  Ph.D., California Institute of Technolo -gy, 2008. Caltech, 2016-. Mark Scheel Research Professor of Physics  Ph.D., Cornell University, 1996. Senior  Research Fellow, Caltech, 2005-;  Lecturer, 2005-06; 2014-15; Research  Professor, 2015-. Axel Scherer, Ph.D.  Bernard Neches Professor of Electrical  Engineering, Applied Physics and Physics; Merkin Institute Professor  B.S., New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 1981; M.S., 1982;  Ph.D., 1985. Associate Professor,  Caltech, 1993-95; Professor, 1995- 2000; Neches Professor, 2000-;  Director, Kavli Nanoscience Institute,  2006-08; Co-Director, 2008-11. Mark J Schiefsky Visiting Associate in Philosophy  B.A., University of Cambridge, 1993; Ph.D., Harvard University, 1999.  Caltech, 2019-21.Maarten Schmidt, Ph.D. Francis L. Moseley Professor of Astron -omy, Emeritus  Ph.D., University of Leiden, 1956; Sc.D., Yale University, 1966. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 1959-64; Professor,  1964-81; Institute Professor, 1981-87;  Moseley Professor, 1987-96; Moseley  Professor Emeritus, 1996-. Executive  Officer for Astronomy, 1972-75; Chair -man, Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, 1976-78; Director, Hale  Observatories, 1978-80.Tapio Schneider, Ph.D.  Theodore Y. Wu Professor of Environ -mental Science and Engineering; Jet Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist Vordipl., Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat  Freiburg, 1993; Ph.D., Princeton  University, 2001. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2002-08; Associate Professor,  2008-09; Professor, 2009-10; Gilloon  Professor, 2010-18; Wu Professor,  2018-;Director, Linde Center, 2011- 12; Executive Officer, 2011-12; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist, 2016-.Jesse Schotter Visiting Associate in English  B.A, Yale University, 2003; M.A, 2008;  Ph.D, 2011.  Caltech, 2020-21.Peter Schroeder, Ph.D.  Shaler Arthur Hanisch Professor of  Computer Science and Applied and Computational Mathematics B.S., Technical University of Berlin,  1987; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1990; M.A., Princeton  University, 1992; Ph.D., 1994. Assistant  Professor of Computer Science,  Caltech, 1995-98; Associate Professor,  1998-2000; Associate Professor of  Computer Science and Applied and Computational Mathematics, 2000-01; Professor, 2001-13; Hanisch Professor,  2013-; Division Deputy Chair, 2012-15;  829Officers and FacultyActing Director of the Center for Ad -vanced Computing Research, 2013-14. Leonard J Schulman, Ph.D.  Professor of Computer Science  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1988; Ph.D., 1992. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 2000-05; Professor,  2005-.Keith C Schwab, Ph.D. Professor of Applied Physics  B.A., University of Chicago, 1990; Ph.D., University of California, 1996.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 2009- 10; Professor, 2010-; Fletcher Jones  Foundation Co-Director of the Kavli  Nanoscience Institute, 2013-15.Daniel M Schwartz Physician in Residence B.A., Haverford College, 1980; M.D.,  University of California, San Francisco,  1984.  Caltech, 2020-22.John H Schwarz, Ph.D. Harold Brown Professor of Theoretical  Physics, Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1962; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1966. Re -search Associate, Caltech, 1972-81;  Senior Research Associate, 1981-85;  Professor of Theoretical Physics,  1985-89; Brown Professor, 1989-2014;  Brown Professor Emeritus, 2015-. Nicholas Z (Nick) Scoville, Ph.D. Francis L. Moseley Professor of Astron -omy, Emeritus  B.A., Columbia University, 1967; Ph.D.,  1972. Professor, Caltech, 1984-96;  Moseley Professor, 1996-2016;  Moseley Professor, Emeritus, 2016-.  Director, Owens Valley Radio Obser -vatory, 1986-96. Executive Officer for  Astronomy, 2000-04. Thayer Scudder, Ph.D.  Professor of Anthropology, Emeritus  A.B., Harvard College, 1952; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1960. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1964-66; Associate  Professor, 1966-69; Professor, 1969- 2000; Professor Emeritus, 2000-. Charles T Sebens, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Philosophy  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009, M.St., University  of Oxford, 2010, Ph.D., University of  Michigan, 2015. Caltech, 2018-.Kimberly A See, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Chemistry  B.S. Colorado School of Mines, 2009; Ph.D., University of California, Santa  Barbara, 2014; Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2017; Assistant Professor,  2017-.John H Seinfeld, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Louis E. Nohl Professor of Chemical  Engineering B.S., University of Rochester, 1964;  Ph.D., Princeton University, 1967;  D.Sc.h.c., University of Patras; Carn -egie Mellon University; Clarkson Uni-versity. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1967-70; Associate Professor, 1970- 74; Professor, 1974-; Nohl Professor,  1979-; Executive Officer for Chemical  Engineering, 1974-90; Executive Officer for Environmental Science and  Engineering, 2016-17; Chair, Division  of Engineering and Applied Science, 1990-2000.Daniel R (Dan) Semlow, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Biochemistry  B.S., University of Illinois, Urbana, 2005; Ph.D., University of Chicago, 2015. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2019-2020, Assistant Professor, 2020-. Peter C Sercel  Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., University of Arizona, 1987; M.S., Caltech, 1988; Ph.D., 1992. Lecturer,  2007-08; 2016-21.Alex L Sessions, Ph.D. Professor of Geobiology  B.A., Williams College, 1991; M.Sc., Dartmouth College, 1996; Ph.D., Indiana University (Bloomington), 2001. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2003-10;  Associate Professor, 2010; Professor,  2010-.Shu-ou Shan, Ph.D. Altair Professor of Chemistry; Executive  Officer for Biochemistry and Molecular  Biophysics B.S., University of Maryland, 1994; Ph.D., Stanford University, 2000.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2005-11;  Professor, 2011-; Altair Professor,  2019-;Executive Officer, 2015-. Mikhail Shapiro, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemical Engineering,  B.S., Brown University, 2004; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technolo -gy, 2008. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2013; Assistant Professor, 2014-18;  HMRI Investigator, 2015-21; Schlinger  Scholar, 2017-18; Professor, 2019- . Mohammad H Shehata Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering 830Trustees, Administration, FacultyiTrustees, Administration, Faculty B.S., Cairo University, Egypt, 2001;  Ph.D., University of Toyama, Japan,  2011. Caltech, 2016-22.Hanna R Shell Eleanor Searle Visiting Professor of  History B.A., Harvard College, 1999; M.A., Yale  University, 2002; Harvard University,  2007. Caltech, 2020-.Joseph E Shepherd, Ph.D.  C. L. "Kelly" Johnson Professor of  Aeronautics and Mechanical Engi -neering B.S., University of South Florida, 1976; Ph.D., Caltech, 1981. Associate Professor, 1993-99; Professor of Aero -nautics, 1999-2005; Professor of Aero -nautics and Mechanical Engineering, 2006-08; Johnson Professor, 2008-;  Davis Leadership Chair, 2018-20; Dean  of Graduate Studies, 2009-15; Vice  President for Student Affairs, 2015-20. Robert P (Bob) Sherman, Ph.D. Professor of Economics and Statis -tics; Executive Officer of the Social  Sciences B.A., Marquette University, 1978; M.A.,  University of Louisville, 1985; M.Phil., Yale University, 1987; Ph.D., 1991.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1996-99;  Associate Professor, 1999-2005; Pro -fessor, 2005-; Executive Officer, 2019-. Rishabh M Shetty Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., University of Mumbai, 2011; M.S.,  Arizona State University, Tempe, 2013;  Ph.D., 2019.  Caltech, 2019-21.Shinsuke (Shin) Shimojo, Ph.D. Gertrude Baltimore Professor of Experi -mental Psychology B.A., University of Tokyo, 1978; M.A.,  1980; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1985. Associate Professor,  Caltech, 1997-98; Professor, 1999- 2010; Baltimore Professor, 2010-.  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.A., Hebrew University, 2001; M.A.,  2003; Ph.D., 2008.  Caltech, 2019-21.Matthew S (Matt) Shum Ph.D., J. Stanley Johnson Professor of  Economics B.A., Columbia University, 1992; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 1998. Professor,  Caltech, 2008-16; J. Stanley Johnson Professor, 2016-. Athanassios G (Thanos) Siapas, Ph.D. Professor of Computation and Neural  Systems B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1990; M.S., 1992; Ph.D., 1996.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2002-08;  Bren Scholar 2003-08; Associate  Professor, 2008-10; Professor, 2010-;  Executive Officer, 2017-20. Constantine (Costis) Sideris Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2010; M.S., 2011, Ph.D., 2016. Lectur-er, Caltech, 2017; Visiting Associate,  2018-22.Daniel M Silevitch Research Professor of Physics  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1996; Ph.D., John Hopkins  University, 2003.  Caltech, 2015-. Linda A Silveira Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Cornell University, 1984; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1990. Assistant  Professor, University of Redlands,  1993-. Caltech, 1996-2001; 2018-20.Leon T Silver, Ph.D.  W. M. Keck Foundation Professor for  Resource Geology, Emeritus  B.S., University of Colorado, 1945; M.S., University of New Mexico, 1948; Ph.D., Caltech, 1955. Assistant Pro -fessor of Geology, 1955-62; Associate  Professor, 1962-65; Professor, 1965- 83; Keck Professor, 1983-96; Keck  Professor Emeritus, 1996-.  Professor of Theoretical Physics  A.B., Harvard University, 2006; A.M.,  2006; CASM., University of Cambridge, 2007; Ph.D., Harvard University, 2012.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2016-17;  Assistant Professor, 2017-20; Asso -ciate Professor, 2020-21; Professor,  2021-.Barry M Simon, Ph.D.; D.Sc.h.c. International Business Machines Pro -fessor of Mathematics and Theoretical  Physics, Emeritus A.B., Harvard College, 1966; Ph.D.,  Princeton University, 1970; D.Sc.h.c.,  Technion-Israel Institute of Technology;  University of Wales Swansea; Ludwig  Maximilians-Universitat Munchen. Sherman Fairchild Distinguished  Scholar, Caltech, 1980-81; Profes -sor, 1981-84; International Business  Machines Professor, 1984-2016; Inter -831Historical Sketchh831Officers and Faculty 832national Business Machines Professor,  Emeritus, 2016-. Executive Officer for  Mathematics, 1997-2003; 2009-13.Melvin I (Mel) Simon, Ph.D. Anne P. and Benjamin F. Biaggini Pro -fessor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus B.S., City College of New York, 1959;  Ph.D., Brandeis University, 1963.  Professor, Caltech, 1982-86; Biaggini  Professor, 1986-2005; Biaggini Profes -sor Emeritus, 2005-; Chair, Division of  Biology, 1995-2000. Mark Simons, Ph.D. John W. and Herberta M. Miles Pro -fessor of Geophysics; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Chief Scientist B.S., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1989; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1995. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 1997-2003; Asso -ciate Professor, 2003-2007; Professor,  2007-17; Miles Professor, 2017-;  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Chief Scientist,  2017-.Peter Smillie Harry Bateman Instructor in Mathe-matics B.S., Stanford University, 2011; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 2018. Caltech  2019-21.Annette J Smith, Ph.D. Professor of Literature, Emeritus  B.A., University of Paris (Sorbonne), 1947; M.A., 1950; Ph.D., 1970. Visiting  Assistant Professor of French, Caltech,  1970-71; Lecturer, 1971-81; Associate  Professor, 1982-85; Professor, 1985- 92; Professor of Literature Emeritus,  1993-.Suzanne Smrekar  Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.Sc., Brown University, 1984; Ph.D.,  Southern Methodist University, 1990.  Caltech, 2019-21.B. T. Soifer  Harold Brown Professor of Physics,  Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1968; Ph.D., Cornell Uni -versity, 1972. Senior Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1978-81; Senior Research  Associate, 1981-89; Professor, 1989- 15; Harold Brown Professor, 2015-17;  Harold Brown Professor, Emeritus,  2017-; Director, Space Infrared Tele -scope Facility (SIRTF) Science Center,  1997-2004. Director, Spitzer Science  Center, 2004-21; Deputy Chair, 2008- 10; Acting Chair, 2010; Division Chair,  2010-14; Kresa Leadership Chair,  2014-15.Maria Spiropulu, Ph.D.  Shang-Yi Ch'en Professor of Physics  B.Sc., Aristotle University of Thessa-loniki, 1993; M.A., Harvard Univer -sity, 1995; Ph.D., 2000. Associate  Professor, Caltech, 2008-11; Professor,  2011-17; Ch'en Professor, 2017-. Charles D Sprenger, Ph.D.  Professor of Economics  B.A., Stanford University, 2002; M.Sc.,  University College London, 2005; Ph.D., University of California, San  Diego, 2011. Caltech, 2020-.Mark Stalzer Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., California State University,  Northridge, 1984; M.S., University of Southern California, 1989; Ph.D., 1993.  Caltech 2010-15; 2018-21.Damian A Stanley Visiting Associate in Psychology  Ph.D., New York University, 2005.  Caltech, 2016-22.Angelike Stathopoulos, Ph.D. Professor of Biology  B.A., University of California, 1992;  Ph.D., Stanford University, 1998.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2005-11;  Professor, 2011-. Charles (Chuck) Steidel, Ph.D. Lee A. DuBridge Professor of Astron -omy A.B., Princeton University, 1984; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1990. Assistant Professor,  1995-97; Associate Professor, 1997- 98; Professor 1998-2004; DuBridge  Professor, 2004-. Executive Officer for  Astronomy, 2004-2007. Paul W Sternberg, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Biology  B.A., Hampshire College, 1978; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  1984. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1987-92; Associate Professor, 1992- 96; Professor, 1996-2004; Morgan Pro -fessor, 2004-17; Bren Professor, 2017-;  HHMI Investigator, 1992-2017. David J Stevenson, Ph.D., D.S.c. Marvin L. Goldberger Professor of  Planetary Science, Emeritus B.S., Victoria University (New Zealand),  1971; M.S., 1972; Ph.D., Cornell  University, 1976; D.S.c., Victoria Uni -versity. Associate Professor, Caltech,  8331980-84; Professor, 1984-95; Van Os -dol Professor, 1995-2011; Goldberger  Professor, 2011-21; Goldberger Profes -sor Emeritus, 2021-. Chair, Division of  Geological and Planetary Sciences, 1989-94.Joann M Stock, Ph.D. Professor of Geology and Geophysics  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1981; M.S., 1981; Ph.D., 1988.  Visiting Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1990; Associate Professor, 1992-98;  Professor, 1998-. Edward M Stolper, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.,  D.Phil.h.c. Distinguished Professor of Geology  A.B., Harvard College, 1974; M.Phil.,  University of Edinburgh, 1976; Ph.D.,  Harvard University, 1979; D.Sc.h.c.,  University of Bristol; University of Ed-inburgh; D.Phil.h.c., Hebrew University.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1979-82;  Associate Professor, 1982-83; Pro -fessor, 1983-90; Leonhard Profes -sor, 1990-2019; Millikan Professor,  2020-21; Distinguished Professor,  2021-. Acting Executive Officer for  Geochemistry, 1989; Executive Officer,  1989-94; Chair, Division of Geological  and Planetary Sciences, 1994-2004; Acting Provost, 2004; Provost, 2007- 17; Larson Provostial Chair, 2013-17;  Interim President, 2013-2014; Senior  Advisor, 2017-19. Brian M Stoltz, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute  B.A., B.S., Indiana University of Penn-sylvania, 1993; M.A., Yale University,  1996; Ph.D., 1997. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2000-06; Associate Professor,  2006-07; Professor, 2007-; Bowles  Professor, 2007-12. Executive Officer,  2010-12; HMRI, Investigator, 2021-. Edward C Stone, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c.  David Morrisroe Professor of Physics;  Vice Provost for Special Projects  S.M., University of Chicago, 1959; Ph.D., 1964; D.Sc.h.c., Harvard  University; Washington University;  University of Chicago; University of Southern California. Research Fellow,  Caltech, 1964-66; Senior Research  Fellow, 1967; Assistant Professor,  1967-71; Associate Professor, 1971- 76; Professor, 1976-94; Morrisroe  Professor, 1994-. Chairman, Division of  Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy,  1983-88; Vice President for Astronom -ical Facilities, 1988-90; Vice President  and Director of the Jet Propulsion  Laboratory, 1991-2001;  Vice Provost  for Special Projects, 2004-. Paul B Stovall Lecturer in Mechanical and Civil  Engineering A.A., Cerritos College, 1992. Caltech, 2020-21.Ellen G Strauss Senior Research Associate in Biology,  Emeritus B.A., Swarthmore College, 1960;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1966. Research Fellow,  1969-73; Senior Research Fellow,  1973-84; Senior Research Associate,  1984-2007; Senior Research Associate  Emeritus, 2007-.James H Strauss, Ph.D. Ethel Wilson Bowles and Robert Bowles Professor of Biology, Emeritus  B.S., Saint Mary's University, 1960;  Ph.D., Caltech, 1967. Assistant Pro -fessor, 1969-75; Associate Professor,  1975-83; Professor, 1983-93; Bowles  Professor, 1993-2007; Bowles Profes -sor Emeritus, 2007-. Executive Officer  for Molecular and Cellular Biology,  1980-89.Andrew M Stuart, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., University of Bristol, 1983; Ph.D., University of Oxford, 1986. Bren Pro -fessor, Caltech, 2016-. Amber D Stubler Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Stony Brook University, 2007;  Ph.D., 2015. Caltech, 2020-22.Tsu-Te J (Judith) Su  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2002, M.S., 2004. Ph.D.,  California Institute of Technology, 2014.  Caltech, 2017-21.Piotr Sulkowski Visiting Associate in Theoretical  Physics M.Sc., Warsaw University, 2002; Ph.D.,  2007.  Caltech, 2012-21.Anne Sullivan Weisman Postdoctoral Instructor in  Visual Culture  B.A., University of California (River -side), 2008, M.A., 2012, Ph.D.,  2018. Caltech , 2019-2022.Officers and Faculty 834Mark R Swain Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.A., University of Virginia, 1989; Ph.D.,  University of Rochester, 1996. Caltech,  2015-22.Christopher M Swank Research Assistant Professor of  Physics B.S., North Carolina State University  Raleigh, 2005; Ph.D., North Carolina  State University Raleigh, 2012. Caltech 2019-.Noel M Swerdlow  Visiting Associate in History  B.A., University of California (Los  Angeles), 1964; M.A., Yale University,  1967; Ph.D., 1968. Professor, Universi -ty of Chicago, 1982-. Visiting Associate  in History, Caltech, 2008, 2010-23;  Visiting Professor, 2008-09. Anna Szumowicz Harry Bateman Instructor in Mathe-matics M.S., University Paris 13, 2014; Ph.D., Durham University, 2019; Ph.D.,  Sorbonne University, 2019. Caltech  2020-23.Reza Tadayon Nejad  Visiting Associate in Neuroscience  Ph.D., University of Calgary, 2011;  M.D., Ahwaz University of Medical Science, 2004. Caltech, 2019-22.Yu-Chong Tai, Ph.D.  Anna L. Rosen Professor of Electrical  Engineering and Medical Engineering; Andrew and Peggy Cherng Medical  Engineering Leadership Chair; Execu-tive Officer for Medical Engineering,  B.S., National Taiwan University, 1981;  M.S., University of California, 1986;  Ph.D., 1989. Assistant Professor of  Electrical Engineering, Caltech, 1989-95; Associate Professor, 1995-2000;  Professor, 2000-05; Professor of  Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering, 2005-13; Rosen Profes -sor, 2013-; Cherng Medical Engineer -ing Leadership Chair, 2017-; Executive  Officer for Electrical Engineering, 2005- 2008; Executive Officer for Medical  Engineering, 2013-.Omer Tamuz, Ph.D.  Professor of Economics and Mathe -matics B.Sc., Tel Aviv University, 2006; M.Sc.,  Weizmann Institute of Science, 2010;  Ph.D., 2013. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2015-19; Professor, 2019-. Armand R Tanguay  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Caltech, 1971; M.S., Yale  University, 1972; M.Phil., 1975; Ph.D.,  1977. Associate Professor, University  of Southern California, 1983-. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 1984; 1999-2003; 2017-22.Robert D Tanner  Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering B.S., University of Michigan, 1962; M.S., 1963; Ph.D., Case Western Re -serve, 1967. Caltech, 2010-22.Hugh P Taylor, Ph.D.  Robert P. Sharp Professor of Geology,  Emeritus B.S., Caltech, 1954; A.M., Harvard  University, 1955; Ph.D., Caltech,  1959. Assistant Professor, 1959-61;  Research Fellow, 1961; Assistant Pro -fessor, 1962-64; Associate Professor,  1964-69; Professor, 1969-81; Sharp  Professor, 1981-2002; Sharp Professor  Emeritus, 2002-. Executive Officer for  Geology, 1987-94. Joao Teixeira  Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering Ph.D., University of Lisbon, 2000. Caltech, 2010-22.Saul A Teukolsky, Ph.D.  Robinson Professor of Theoretical  Astrophysics  B.Sc., University of the Witwatersrand, 1970; Ph.D., California Institute of  Technology, 1973. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2015-16; Robinson Professor,  2017-.Andrew F Thompson, Ph.D.  Professor of Environmental Science  and Engineering; Divisional Academic Officer for Geological and Planetary  Sciences B.S., Dartmouth College, 2000; C.A.S., University of Cambridge, 2001, M.Phil., 2002; Ph.D., Scripps Institute of Oceanography, 2006. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2011-17; Professor,  2017-; Academic Officer, 2019-. Matthew W Thomson, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Computational  Biology; Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute  B.A., Harvard University, 2001; Ph.D.,  2011. Visiting Associate, Caltech,  2016; Assistant Professor, 2017-; HMRI  Investigator, 2018-. 835Kip S Thorne, Nobel Laureate, Ph.D,  D.Sc.h.c., D.h.c., L.H.D.h.c. Richard P. Feynman Professor of Theo -retical Physics, Emeritus  B.S., Caltech, 1962; Ph.D., Princeton University, 1965; D.Sc.h.c., Illinois Col -lege; Utah State University; University of Chicago; D.h.c., Moscow University; University of Glasgow; L.H.D.h.c., The Claremont Graduate University.  Research Fellow in Physics, Caltech,  1966-67; Associate Professor of The -oretical Physics, 1967-70; Professor,  1970-91; William R. Kenan Professor,  1981-91; Feynman Professor, 1991- 2009; Feynman Professor Emeritus,  2009-.David A Tirrell, Ph.D., D.h.c.  Provost; Ross McCollum-William H.  Corcoran Professor of Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering; Carl and Shirley Larson Provostial Chair  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1974;  M.S., University  of Massachusetts, 1976; Ph.D., 1978; D.h.c., Eindhoven Technical Univer -sity. McCollum-Corcoran Professor  and Professor, Caltech, 1998-. Chair,  Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 1999-2009; Director,  Beckman Institute, 2011-17, Provost,  2017-; Larson Provostial Chair, 2017-. Francois Tissot, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Geochemis -try;  Investigator, Heritage Medical  Research Institute  Diplôme d'Ingenieur, École National  Supérieure de Géologie, 2009; M.Sc.,  Lulea University of Technology, 2009;  Ph.D., University of Chicago, 2015. Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2017-18;  Assistant Professor, 2018-; HMRI  Investigator, 2021-. Ritsuko H (Hirai-Toner) Toner  Lecturer in Japanese  B.A., Kyoto University of Foreign Stud -ies (Japan), 1974; M.A., University of Southern California, 1979; Ph.D., 1987.  Caltech, 1992-.  Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.A., University of Oxford, 1978; M.A.,  1981; D.Phil., 1984. Research Scien -tist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 1986-.  Caltech, 2001-22.Sandra Troian, Ph.D.  Professor of Applied Physics, Aeronau -tics, and Mechanical Engineering B.A., Harvard University, 1980; M.S.,  Cornell University, 1984; Ph.D., 1987.  Moore Distinguished Scholar, Caltech,  2004-05; Professor, 2006-. Joel A Tropp, Ph.D.  Steele Family Professor of Applied and  Computational Mathematics B.A., B.S., University of Texas (Aus -tin), 1999; M.S., 2001; Ph.D., 2004. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2007-12;  Professor, 2012-17; Steele Family  Professor, 2017-. Victor C Tsai  Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.S., California Institute of Technology,  2004; A.M., Harvard University, 2006;  Ph.D., 2009. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2011-17; Professor, 2017-19.;  Visiting Associate, 2019-22. Doris Y Tsao, Ph.D.  Professor of Biology; T&C Chen Center  for Systems Neuroscience Leadership  Chair; Investigator, Howard Hughes  Medical Institute; Director, T&C Chen  Center for Systems Neuroscience  B.S., Caltech, 1996; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 2002. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 2008-2014; Professor, 2014-;  T&C Chen Center for Systems Neuro -science Leadership Chair, 2017-; HHMI  Investigator, 2015-; Director, 2017-. Anita Tusche  Visiting Associate in Neuroeconomics  B.Sc/M.Sc., Technical University Dres -den, 2007; Ph.D.,  Humboldt University Berlin, 2013. Caltech, 2018-22.Carol C (Chace) Tydell  Lecturer in Biology  B.S., University of California (Davis),  1980; D.V.M., 1982. Adjunct Professor,  Pasadena City College, 2007-2010. Instructor Biological Sciences, Cerritos College, 2010 -. Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2007-10; Lecturer, 2008,  2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015-21.Paul A Ullrich Visiting Associate in Environmental  Science and Engineering B.S., University of Waterloo, 2007;  M.S., 2007; Ph.D., University of Michi-gan, 2011. Caltech, 2021-22.Christopher M (Chris) Umans, Ph.D. Professor of Computer Science;  Executive Officer for Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.A., Williams College, 1996; Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, 2000.  Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2002-08;  Associate Professor, 2008-10; Profes -Officers and Faculty 836sor, 2010-; EAS Division Deputy Chair,  2018-20; Executive Officer, 2020-. Kerry J Vahala, Ph.D.  Ted and Ginger Jenkins Professor of In -formation Science and Technology and  Applied Physics; Executive Officer for  Applied Physics and Materials Science B.S., Caltech, 1980; M.S., 1981; Ph.D., 1985. Research Fellow in Applied  Physics, 1985; Assistant Professor,  1986-90; Associate Professor, 1990- 96; Professor, 1996-2002; Jenkins  Professor, 2002-; Executive Officer,  2013-.Palghat P Vaidyanathan  Kiyo and Eiko Tomiyasu Professor of  Electrical Engineering B.Sc., University of Calcutta, 1974; B.Tech., 1977; M.Tech., 1979; Ph.D.,  University of California (Santa Barbara),  1982. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1983-88; Associate Professor, 1988- 93; Professor, 1993-2018; Tomiyasu  Professor, 2018-; Executive Officer for  Electrical Engineering, 2002-05.Joan S Valentine  Visiting Associate in Geobiology  A.B., Smith College, 1967; Ph.D., Princeton University, 1971. Professor,  University of California (Los Angeles),  1981-. Caltech, 1986-2001, 2015-22.Michele Vallisneri  Visiting Associate in Theoretical Astro -physics Laurea, University of Parma, Italy,  1997; M.S., 2000; Ph.D., Caltech, 2002. Research Scientist, Jet Pro -pulsion Laboratory, 2005-. Lecturer,  Caltech, 2003-05;  Visiting Associate,  2005-23.John P Van Deusen  Lecturer in Mechanical and Civil  Engineering A.A., El Camino College, 1978; B.S., California State University (Long  Beach), 2003. Caltech, 2004-21.David A Van Valen, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003; Ph.D., Caltech,  2011; M.D., University of California  Los Angeles, 2013; Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2017-18; Research Assistant  Professor, 2018; Assistant Professor,  2018-; HMRI Investigator, 2021-. Michael C Vanier  Teaching Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences B.S., McGill University, 1986; M.S.,  California Institute of Technology, 1993;  Ph.D., 2001. Lecturer in Computing  and Mathematical Sciences, 2004-2020; Teaching Professor of Comput -ing and Mathematical Sciences, 2020-.Alexander J Varshavsky, Ph.D.  Thomas Hunt Morgan Professor of  Biology B.S., Moscow State University, 1970;  Ph.D., Institute of Molecular Biology,  1973. Smits Professor, Caltech, 1992- 17; Morgan Professor, 2017-. Paulo Vasconcelos  Visiting Associate in Geochemistry  B.S., University of Kansas, 1983; M.A., University of Texas, Austin, 1987;  Ph.D., University of California, Berke -ley, 1992.  Caltech, 2011-16, 2020-22. Benjamin T Vest  Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science M.Sc., University of Paris-Sud, 2012; Ph.D., Ecole Polytechnique, 2015. Caltech, 2019-2022.Michael A (Mike) Vicic  Teaching Professor in Chemical Engi -neering B.S., University of Akron, 1992; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1999. Lecturer, 2003-08;  2010; 2012-.Thomas G Vidick, Ph.D.  Professor of Computing and Mathe -matical Sciences B.S., Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris,  2007; M.S., 2007; Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, 2011. Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2014-17; Associate  Professor, 2017-18; Professor, 2018-. Zoltan Vidnyanszky  Olga Taussky & John Todd Instructor in  Mathematics Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest,  M.S., 2011; Ph.D., 2015. Caltech 2020 -23.Scott C Virgil  Lecturer in Chemistry  B.S., Caltech, 1987; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 1991.  Caltech, 2008; 2009:  2010; 2011; 2013; 2014; 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018; 2020; 2021.Petr Vogel  Senior Research Associate in Physics,  837Emeritus Ph.D., Joint Institute of Nuclear Re-search (USSR), 1966. Senior Research  Fellow, Caltech, 1970-75; Research  Associate, 1975-81; Senior Research  Associate, 1981-2004; Lecturer, 1983- 90; 1992;  1995-96; 1999-2000; 2006; Senior Research Associate Emeritus,  2004-.Rochus E (Robbie) Vogt, Ph.D.  R. Stanton Avery Distinguished Service  Professor and Professor of Physics,  Emeritus S.M., University of Chicago, 1957; Ph.D., 1961. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1962-65; Associate Professor,  1965-70; Professor, 1970-82; R.  Stanton Avery Distinguished Service  Professor, 1982-2002;R. Stanton  Avery Distinguished Service Professor  Emeritus, 2002-. Chief Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 1977-78; Chair -man, Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, 1978-83; Acting Direc -tor, Owens Valley Radio Observatory,  1980-81; Vice President and Provost,  1983-87; Director, Laser Interferom -eter Gravitational- wave Observatory Project, 1987-94. Lilien N Voong  Lecturer in Engineering  Ph.D., Northwestern University, 2017.  Caltech, 2019; 2020; 2021.Peter W Voorhees  Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.Sc. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 1977; Ph.D., 1982. Caltech, Moore  Distinguished Scholar, 2019; Visiting  Associate, 2019-21.Rebecca M Voorhees, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering; Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute  B.S., Yale University, 2007; M.Sc.,  2007; Ph.D., MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, 2011. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2016-17; Assistant Professor, 2017-; HMRI Investigator,  2017-.Daniel A Wagenaar  Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering M.S., University of Amsterdam, 1997;  M.S., King's College - London, 1998; Ph.D., Caltech, 2006; 2016-.David B Wales, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus  B.S., University of British Columbia, 1961; M.A., 1962; Ph.D., Harvard  University, 1967. Bateman Research  Fellow, Caltech, 1967-68; Assistant  Professor, 1968-71; Associate Profes -sor, 1971-77; Professor, 1977-2008;  Professor Emeritus, 2008-. Associate  Dean of Students, 1976-80; Dean of Students, 1980-84; Executive Officer  for Mathematics, 1985-91; Master of Student Houses, 1991-97.Duane E Waliser  Visiting Associate in Planetary Science  B.S., Oregon State University, 1985;  M.S., University of California (San  Diego), 1987; Ph.D., 1992. Research  Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,  2004-. Caltech, 2004-23.Kaihang Wang, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.S., University College, London, 2004; Ph.D., University of Cambridge, 2008. Visiting Associate, Caltech, 2017-18;  Assistant Professor, 2018-. Lihong Wang, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Medical Engineering  and Electrical Engineering B.S., Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1984; M.S., 1987;  Ph.D., Rice University, 1992. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2016; Bren Profes -sor, 2017-. Lu Wang, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics  B.S., Peking University, 2006; Ph.D.,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2011. Caltech, 2019-.Xiangyun Wang  Lecturer in Chinese  M.A., Central Institute for Nationalities (China), 1985; Ph.D., Harvard Universi -ty, 1995. Caltech, 2001-. Zhen-Gang Wang, Ph.D.  Dick and Barbara Dickinson Professor  of Chemical Engineering; Executive Officer for Chemical Engineering  B.Sc., Beijing University, 1982; Ph.D.,  University of Chicago, 1987. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 1991-97; Associate  Professor, 1997-2002; Professor,  2002-15; Hanson Professor, 2015-17;  Dickinson Professor, 2017-; Executive  Officer, 2019-. Michael S Waterman  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., Oregon University, 1964; M.S.,  1966; M.A., Michigan University, 1968;  Ph.D., 1969.  Caltech, 2019-22.Officers and Faculty 838Michael M Watkins, Ph.D.  Professor of Aerospace and Geophysics  B.S., University of Texas, Austin, 1983;  M.S., 1985; Ph.D., 1989. Professor,  2016-; Vice President and Director,  2016-21, Caltech.Glenn A Waychunas  Visiting Associate in Geochemistry  B.A., Temple University, 1972; Ph.D.,  University of California (Los Angeles),  1979. Caltech, 2020-22.Jennifer (Jenn) Weaver  Lecturer in Engineering  B.S., University of Toronto, 2005;  Ph.D., 2012; M.S., University of Water -loo, 2007. Caltech, 2019; 2020; 2021.Lu Wei, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Chemistry; In -vestigator, Heritage Medical Research  Institute B.S., Nanjing University, 2010; Ph.D.,  Columbia University, 2015. Visiting  Associate, Caltech, 2017-18; Assistant Professor, 2018-; HMRI Investigator,  2021-.Sander Weinreb  Visiting Associate in Astronomy  B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 1958; Ph.D., 1963. Caltech,  1999-2024.Alan J Weinstein, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics; Executive Officer  for Physics A.B., Harvard University, 1978; Ph.D.,  1983. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1988-95; Associate Professor, 1995- 99; Professor, 2000-; Executive Officer,  2020-.Cindy A Weinstein, Ph.D.  Eli and Edythe Broad Professor of  English B.A., Brandeis University, 1982; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1989. Assistant  Professor of Literature, Caltech, 1989- 95; Associate Professor, 1995-2004;  Associate Professor of English, 2004- 05; Professor, 2005-16; Broad Profes -sor, 2016-; Executive Officer, 2008-14;  Vice Provost, 2014-18, 2019-21; Chief  Diversity Officer, 2015-18, 2019-21. Daniel P (Dan) Weitekamp, Ph.D.  Professor of Chemical Physics  B.A., Harvard College, 1974; Ph.D.,  University of California, 1982. Assistant  Professor of Chemistry, Caltech, 1985- 91; Associate Professor of Chemical  Physics, 1991-2006; Professor, 2006-. Paul O Wennberg, Ph.D.  R. Stanton Avery Professor of Atmo -spheric Chemistry and Environmental  Science and Engineering; Executive Officer for Environmental Science and  Engineering; Director, Ronald and  Maxine Linde Center for Global Envi-ronmental Science  B.A., Oberlin College, 1985; Ph.D., Harvard University, 1994. Associate  Professor of Atmospheric Chemistry  and Environmental Engineering Sci -ence, Caltech, 1998-2001; Professor,  2001-03; Professor of Atmospheric  Chemistry and Environmental Science  and Engineering, 2003-04; Avery Pro -fessor, 2004-; Director, Linde Center,  2008-11, 2014-; Executive Officer,  2012-; Acting Director, Linde Center,  2012-14.Michael W Werner  Visiting Associate in Physics  B.A., Haverford College, 1963; Ph.D.,  Cornell University, 1968. Caltech,  1992-96; 2009-13; 2016-22.Brian P Wernicke, Ph.D.  Chandler Family Professor of Geology  B.S., University of Southern California,  1978; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1982. Visiting Professor,  Caltech, 1990; Professor of Geology,  1992-2001; Chandler Professor, 2001-. Nicolas Wey-Gomez, Ph.D.  Professor of History  B.A., Brandeis University, 1986; M.A.,  Johns Hopkins University, 1987; M.A.,  1991; PhD, 1996. Associate Professor,  Caltech, 2010; Professor, 2010-. Kara Whatley University Librarian B.A., Hendrix College, 1997; MLIS, University of Oklahoma, 1999; M.S., Texas Tech University, 2004.  Caltech,  2019-2024.Mark E Wiedenbeck Visiting Associate in Physics  B.S., University of Michigan, 1971; Ph.D., 1978. Principal Research Scien -tist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 1992-.  Visiting Associate, 2009-22; Lecturer,  2011.Adam C Wierman, Ph.D. Professor of Computing and Mathe -matical Sciences; Director, Information  Science and Technology  B.S., Carnegie Mellon University, 2001;  M.S., 2004; Ph.D., 2007. Assistant Professor, Caltech, 2007-12; Professor,  2012-; Executive Officer, 2015-20;  839Associate Director, 2015-16; Director,  2016-.Danielle L Wiggins, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of History  B.A., Yale University, 2012; Ph.D., Em -ory University, 2018. Caltech, 2019-. John C Williams Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.S., University of California (Santa  Cruz), 1990; M.S., Columbia University,  1993; Ph.D, 1995. Caltech, 2020-21.Kenneth (Ken) Williford  Visiting Associate in Geobiology  B.S., University of the South, 1998; M.S., University of Washington, 2000;  Ph.D., 2007. Caltech, 2013-23.Richard M Wilson, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus  B.S., Indiana University, 1966; M.S.,  Ohio State University, 1968; Ph.D.,  1969. Sherman Fairchild Distinguished  Scholar, Caltech, 1976; Professor,  1980-2014; Professor Emeritus, 2014-. Erik Winfree, Ph.D.  Professor of Computer Science,  Computation and Neural Systems, and Bioengineering B.S., University of Chicago, 1991; Ph.D., Caltech, 1998. Assistant Profes -sor, 1999-2006; Associate Professor of  Computer Science and Computation and Neural Systems, 2006-07; Asso-ciate Professor, 2007-10; Professor,  2010-.Jay R Winkler Faculty Associate in Chemistry; Lectur-er in Chemistry B.S., Stanford University, 1978; Ph.D.,  Caltech, 1984. Lecturer, 2002; 2004- 05; 2009-10; 2013; 2014; 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018. Faculty Associate, 2008-.Kenneth J Winston Lecturer in Economics  B.S., Caltech, 1973; M.S., 1974; Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  1979.  Caltech, 2011; 2012; 2013; 2014; 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018; 2020; 2021.Mark B Wise, Ph.D. John A. McCone Professor of High  Energy Physics  B.Sc., University of Toronto, 1976;  M.Sc., 1977; Ph.D., Stanford Uni -versity, 1980. Assistant Professor of  Theoretical Physics, Caltech, 1982-84;  Associate Professor, 1984-85; Pro -fessor, 1985-92; McCone Professor,  1992-.Pernilla Wittung  Visiting Associate in Chemistry  B.S., Chalmers University of Technol -ogy, Ph.D., 1996. Caltech, 2015; 2018;  2021-22.Barbara J Wold, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Molecular Biology;  Allen V. C. Davis and Lenabelle Davis  Leadership Chair, Richard N. Merkin  Institute for Translational Research;  Director, Richard N. Merkin Institute for  Translational Research  B.S., Arizona State University (Tempe),  1973; Ph.D., Caltech, 1978. Research  Fellow, 1978; Assistant Professor,  1981-88; Associate Professor, 1988- 96; Professor, 1996-2002; Bren Pro -fessor, 2003-; Davis Leadership Chair;  2019-; Director, 2001-11, 2019-. Juliann K (Juli) Wolfgram  Lecturer in Art History  B.A., Scripps College, 1979; M.A., Uni-versity of Kansas, 1986; M.Phil., 1986; Ph.D., 1986. Caltech, 1992-2012: 2016; 2018; 2019; 2020; 2021.James F Woodward, Ph.D.  J. O. and Juliette Koepfli Professor of  the Humanities, Emeritus B.A., Carleton College, 1968; Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1977. Mel -lon Postdoctoral Instructor, Caltech,  1983-86; Assistant Professor, 1986-88;  Associate Professor, 1988-92; Pro -fessor, 1992-2001; Koepfli Professor,  2001-2010; Koepfli Professor Emeritus,  2010-. Executive Officer for the Hu -manities, 1992-95; 2000-2003.Pin Chieh Wu  Visiting Associate in Applied Physics  and Materials Science B.S., National Taiwan University, 2009;  M.S., 2012; Ph.D., 2015. Caltech, 2019-21.Theodore Y Wu, Ph.D.  Professor of Engineering Science,  Emeritus B.Sc., Chiao-Tung University (China),  1946; M.S., Iowa State University,  1948; Ph.D., Caltech, 1952. Research  Fellow in Hydrodynamics, 1952-55;  Assistant Professor of Applied Me -chanics, 1955-57; Associate Professor,  1957-61; Professor, 1961-66; Professor  of Engineering Science, 1966-96; Professor Emeritus, 1996-. Wei-Li Wu  Visiting Associate in Biology and Bio -logical Engineering B.S., National Sun Yat-Sen University,  Officers and Faculty 8402001; M.S., 2003; Ph.D., National De-fense Medical Center, 2011.  Caltech,  2018-21.Peter J Wyllie, Ph.D., D.Sc.h.c. Professor of Geology, Emeritus  B.Sc. (Geology and Physics), Saint Andrews University (Scotland), 1952;  B.Sc. (Geology), 1955; Ph.D., 1958; D.Sc.h.c., Saint Andrews University.  Professor, Caltech, 1983-99; Professor  Emeritus, 1999-. Chairman, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, 1983-87; Divisional Academic Officer,  1994-99.Si Xie Research Assistant Professor of  Physics B.Sc., University of Toronto, 2006;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Tech -nology, 2012. Caltech, 2018-. Yi Xin, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Economics  B.A, B.S., Peking University, 2012;  M.A., Johns Hopkins University, 2016;  Ph.D., 2018; Caltech, 2018-.Changhuei Yang, Ph.D.  Thomas G. Myers Professor of Electri -cal Engineering, Bioengineering, and Medical Engineering;  Investigator,  Heritage Medical Research Institute  B.S. (Electrical Engineering); B.S. (Physics),  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1997; M.S.(Engineering),  1997; B.S. (Mathematics), 2002; Ph.D., 2001. Assistant Professor of Electrical  Engineering, Caltech, 2003-04; Assis-tant Professor of Electrical Engineering  and Bioengineering, 2004-09; Asso-ciate Professor, 2009-10; Professor,  2010-16; Myers Professor, 2016-;  HMRI Investigator, 2021-. Amnon Yariv, Ph.D.  Martin and Eileen Summerfield Profes -sor of Applied Physics and Electrical Engineering B.S., University of California, Berkeley,  1954; M.S., 1956; Ph.D., 1958. As-sociate Professor, Caltech, 1964-66;  Professor, 1966-74; Professor of Elec -trical Engineering and Applied Physics, 1974-79; Myers Professor, 1979-96;  Summerfield Professor, 1996-. Nai-Chang Yeh, Ph.D.  Professor of Physics  B.S., National Taiwan University, 1983;  Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1988. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1989-95; Associate Professor,  1995-97; Professor, 1997-; Fletcher  Jones Foundation Co-Director, Kavli  Nanoscience Institute, 2013-19.Yun Yen  Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering M.D., Taipei Medical College, 1982;  Ph,.D., Thomas Jefferson University,  1987.  Caltech, 2007-15; 2020-21.Zhifu Yin  Visiting Associate in Medical Engi -neering B.S., Liaoning Technical University,  2008; M.S., 2008; Ph.D., Dalian Uni-versity of Technology, 2016. Caltech,  2019-2021.Kakani K Young  Visiting Associate in Aerospace  B.S., University of Washington, 2004;  M.S., California Institute of Technology,  2005; Ph.D., 2010. Caltech, 2021- 2023.Shaocai Yu  Visiting Associate in Chemical Engi -neering B.S., Peking University, 1985; M. S.,  1988; Ph.D., North Carolina State  University Raleigh, 1999. Caltech, 2017-21.Tony Yue Yu, Ph.D.  Professor of Mathematics  B.A., Universite Paris 7, 2011; M.S.. 2013; Ph.D., Universite Sorbonne Paris Cite, 2016. Professor, Caltech, 2021-. Yisong Yue, Ph.D.  Professor of Computing and Mathe -matical Sciences B.S., University of Illinois, 2005; Ph.D., Cornell University, 2010.  Assistant  Professor, Caltech, 2014-20; Professor,  2020-.Mary A Yui  Research Professor of Biology and  Biological Engineering B.A., University of California (Santa  Barbara), 1977, M.S., Oregon State  University, 1982; Ph.D., University of  Florida,  1995. Senior Research Fellow,  2005-09; Lecturer, Caltech, 2005;  2020; Research Professor, 2009- Yuk L Yung, Ph.D.  Professor of Planetary Science; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist B.S., University of California, 1969;  Ph.D., Harvard University, 1974.  Visiting Associate, Caltech, 1976; As -sistant Professor, 1977-82; Associate  Professor, 1982-86; Professor, 1986- 8412011, 2017-; Smits Family Professor,  2012-16; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Research Scientist, 2014-15; Jet  Propulsion Laboratory Senior Research  Scientist, 2015-.Gabriel Zada Visiting Associate in Medical Engi -neering B.A., University of California (Berkeley),  2000; M.D., University of California  (San Francisco), 2004; M.S., University of Southern California, 2015. Caltech,  2021-23.Howard Zebker  Visiting Associate in Geophysics  B.S., Caltech, 1976; M.S., University of California (Los Angeles), 1979; Ph.D.,  Stanford University, 1984. Caltech,  2019-21.Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz, Ph.D.  Bren Professor of Biology and Biologi -cal Engineering M.Sc., University of Warsaw, 1988;  Ph.D, 1993; Visiting Associate,  Caltech, 2018-19; Bren Professor,  2019-.Zhongwen Zhan, Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Geophysics  B.S., University of Science and Tech -nology of China, 2006; M.S., 2008; Ph.D., California Institute of Technolo -gy, 2013. Caltech, 2015-. Xinwen Zhu, Ph.D. Professor of Mathematics  A.B., Peking University, 2004; Ph.D.,  University of California, Berkeley, 2009.  Associate Professor, Caltech, 2014-16;  Professor, 2016-. Kai G Zinn, Ph.D. Howard and Gwen Laurie Smits Pro -fessor of Biology B.A., University of California (San Di -ego), 1977; Ph.D., Harvard University,  1983. Assistant Professor, Caltech,  1989-95; Associate Professor, 1995- 1999. Professor, 1999-2017; Smits  Professor, 2017-. Jonas Zmuidzinas, Ph.D. Merle Kingsley Professor of Physics;  Director, Caltech Optical Observatories  B.S., Caltech, 1981; Ph.D., University of California, 1987. Assistant Professor,  Caltech, 1989-95; Associate Professor,  1995-2000; Professor 2000-10; King -sley Professor, 2010-; Jet Propulsion  Laboratory Senior Research Scientist,  2005-11; Jet Propulsion Laboratory  Chief Technologist, 2011-16; Director,  Micro-Devices Laboratory, Jet Pro -pulsion Laboratory, 2007-11; Director,  2018-.Konstantin M Zuev Teaching Assistant Professor of Com -puting and Mathematical Sciences B.S., Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia, 2003; M.S.,  2008; Ph.D., Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2009.  Visiting Associate in Computing and  Mathematical Sciences, 2011-13; Lecturer in Computing and Mathe -matical Sciences, 2015-20; Teaching  Assistant Professor of Computing and  Mathematical Sciences, 2020-.Kathryn M Zurek, Ph.D.  Professor of Theoretical Physics  B.S., Bethel University, 2001; Ph.D.,  University of Washington, 2006; Pro -fessor, Caltech, 2019-. Officers and Faculty 842INDEXAabroad studies, 12, 191Œ197, 223Œ224 absences. See also leaves of absence emergency contact notification   policy, 40 academic advisement, 199academic calendar, 4Œ5, 332 academic partnerships, 11Œ12academic records. See also grades and   grading access to, 36Œ39 official transcripts, 39  privacy, access to academic    records, 26, 36Œ39  transcripts, 39 veterans, 34Œ35academic requirements. See scholastic  requirements Academics and Research Committee  (ARC), 13, 19acceptance procedure, 184 accessibility and accommodation ADA compliance, 57Œ59 Caltech Accessibility Services for   Students, 23, 26 special meals, 23Accessibility Services for Students (CASS), 23, 26accreditation, 41 activities centers Hameetman Center, 17, 23, 24  Student Activities Center, 18 ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) compliance, 57Œ59Add Day, 30, 31, 199, 204 adding courses, policies for, 199 administrative officers, 744Œ746 admissions as freshman, 183Œ186  graduate program, 329Œ330, 345,   346, 347  transfer students, 186Œ189Advanced Placement (AP) programs,  185Œ186advisors and advising academic advisement, 199 career development services, 27Œ29  faculty-student relations, 18  freshman advisors, 18  graduate and professional school   advising, 28Œ29  graduate program, 338Œ339, 348,   349 information and data sciences  double majors, 309Œ310 mental health counselors. See  counseling services  option advisors, 18 pre-health careers advising, 28Œ29  sex- and gender-based misconduct   policies, 90 aeronautics. See also aerospace    aerospace areas of research,     133 graduate program, 363Œ368 aerospace, 131Œ135  areas of research, 131Œ134  courses, 458Œ467 facilities, 131, 134Œ135 graduate option, 363Œ368 laboratories, 131, 134Œ135 undergraduate minor, 245 affirmative consent, sex- and gender-  based misconduct policies, 79Œ80Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps  (AFROTC), 198Œ199alcohol abuse policies, 113Œ118Alles Laboratory for Molecular Biology,  144allowance of credit, scholastic  requirements, 208Œ209 alumni, employment experiences, 29Alumni Association (CAA), 29Alumni House, 29Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  compliance, 26, 57Œ59amnesty, sex- and gender-based  misconduct policies, 104Annenberg Center for Information  Science and Technology, 166 Annual Security and Fire Safety Report,  78anonymous reporting  harassment, 121 sex- and gender-based misconduct,    69, 70, 74anthropology courses, 467Œ468 AP (Advanced Placement) programs,  185Œ186apartment buildings, graduate students, 353appeal involuntary leaves of absence, 203,    338 refunds, 212  sex- and gender-based misconduct  complaints, 112Œ113application fee, 209application for admission, 183, 189 fee, 209 graduate programs, 329Œ330  undergraduate, 183 application for financial aid, 215applied and computational mathematics, 135Œ136 courses, 468Œ475 double majors, 246 graduate program, 369Œ371  undergraduate option, 246Œ248 applied mechanics, 136Œ137 courses, 475Œ477 graduate program, 371Œ375  laboratories, 137applied physics, 137Œ138 courses, 477Œ484843 graduate program, 375Œ379  undergraduate option, 248Œ250 applied sciences, undergraduate  options, 287Œ289ARC (Academics and Research  Committee), 13, 19archives  Caltech Archives and Special   Collections, 15  Caltech Collection of Open Digital     Archives (Coda), 14 Archives and Special Collections, 15 art history courses, 730Œ736arts. See also performing and visual arts;  visual culture  courses, 690Œ691, 695Œ697,  730Œ736 rehearsal facilities, 17 assault. See sexual assault; violence and  violence prevention assistantships, graduate, 354Œ355Associated Students of California  Institute of Technology, Inc. (ASCIT),  19Œ20, 42associations. See student activities   astronomy. See observatories    and observational facilitiesastrophysics, 138Œ140. See also    observatories and observational  facilities areas of research, 138Œ140  courses, 484Œ490 double majors, 250 graduate program, 380Œ383  history of program, 139Œ140  library, 14  undergraduate minor, 253Œ254  undergraduate option, 250Œ254 Atacama Large Millimeter/submm Array  (ALMA), 140Athletics, Physical Education &   Recreation (APER) department,    18Œ19, 705. See also physical  educationattendance, refunds and repayments,  210Œ211auditing courses, 29Avery House, 16, 186 BBachelor's degree. See also  undergraduate program  candidacy, scholastic requirements,   207 educational philosophy, 15 Bechtel Residence, 16Œ17, 186Beckman Institute, 12, 144, 148Beckman Laboratory of Chemical  Synthesis, 147Œ148biochemistry and molecular biophysics,  141 areas of research, 141  courses, 491Œ492 graduate programs, 383Œ385 bioengineering, 142Œ143 courses, 492Œ499 graduate program, 385Œ387  Rosen Bioengineering Center, 13  undergraduate option, 254Œ257 biology, 143Œ144. See also  bioengineering AP/IB credit, 185  areas of research, 143Œ144  Broad Center for the Biological   Sciences, 144  classroom buildings, 144  courses, 491Œ512 facilities, 144 graduate programs, 387Œ393,   441Œ443 laboratories, 144 microbiology, 171Œ172  neurobiology, 172  premedical program, 258  systems biology, 181  undergraduate minor, 262  undergraduate option, 257Œ262 biophysics areas of research, 141  graduate programs, 383Œ385 Blacker House, 16, 186Board of Control, 20Œ21 board of trustees, 739Œ743 bonding leaves of absence, 202, 336Brain Imaging Center, 176 Braun House, 17, 186Braun Laboratories, 144, 148Bridge Laboratory of Physics, 175Broad Center for the Biological  Sciences, 144, 148building directory, 7 buildings and facilities. See also Caltech Library and division libraries; classroom buildings; housing;  laboratories; observatories and    observational facilities; specific   buildings by name athletics and athletic facilities, 18Œ19 Beckman Institute, 144 Center for Teaching, Learning, &   Outreach, 13  directory, 7  Hixon Writing Center, 13Œ14  map of campus, 6 on-campus buildings, 6Œ7business, economics, and management  (BEM) courses, 512Œ515 undergraduate option, 263Œ265 CCAEL (Careers Advising and Experiential  Learning), 27Œ29 cafeterias. See dining servicesCahill Center for Astronomy and  Astrophysics, 175 Cahill Library for Astrophysics, 14 Cal Grants A and B, 216California Education Code (CEC), sex-  and gender-based misconduct policies,  Officers and Faculty 84483Œ84Caltech Accessibility Services for  Students (CASS), 23, 26Caltech Alumni Association (CAA), 29Caltech Archives and Special  Collections, 15CaltechAUTHORS, 14Caltech Brain Imaging Center, 176 Caltech Center for Inclusion & Diversity (CCID), 22Œ23Caltech Collection of Open Digital  Archives (Coda), 14 Caltech Community's Statement on  Ethical Conduct, 44Œ46CaltechDATA, 14 Caltech ID card charges, 214, 352 Caltech-Kaiser Permanente School of  Medicine MD/PhD Program, 392 Caltech Library and division libraries,  14Œ15. See also specific program  Archives and Special Collections, 15  Avery House, 16  Cahill Library for Astrophysics, 14  Collection of Open Digital Archives  (Coda), 14 Dabney Library for Humanities and  Social Sciences, 14 Fairchild Library of Engineering and  Applied Science, 14, 168 Lookout, 14 Student Activities Center, 18 Caltech Project for Effective Teaching  (CPET), 13Caltech's Institute Environment, Health  and Safety Committee (IEHSC), 60Caltech Store, 17, 24 Caltech Submillimeter Observatory  (CSO), 140, 174, 175CaltechTHESIS, 14Caltech-UCLA Medical Scientist Training  Program (MSTP), 392 Caltech-USC MD/PhD Program, 392 Caltech Work-Study program, 29,  222Œ223The Caltech Y, 23 Cambridge Examinations, 330Cambridge Scholars Program, 191Œ192 campus. See also buildings and facilities building directory, 7  map, 6Campus Security sex- and gender-based misconduct  reporting, 78  violence reporting, 125 Cann Laboratory, 134 career fairs, 28 Careers Advising and Experiential  Learning (CAEL), 27Œ29 CARE Team, 26Œ27 CARMA (Combined Array for Research  in Millimeter-wave Astronomy), 140 CASS (Caltech Accessibility Services for  Students), 23, 26Catalina Graduate Apartment Complex,  353CCID (Caltech Center for Inclusion &  Diversity), 22Œ23Center for Autonomous Systems and  Technologies (CAST), 131, 135 Center for Biological Circuit Design, 166 Center for Neuromorphic Systems  Engineering, 166Center for Teaching, Learning, &  Outreach (CTLO), 13 Center for the Mathematics of  Information, 166Center for the Physics of Information,  166Charyk Laboratory of Bioinspired Design  and Biopropulsion, 131 chemical engineering, 144Œ146 areas of research, 144Œ146  courses, 515Œ522 graduate program, 393Œ398  laboratories, 146 undergraduate option, 265Œ268 chemistry, 146Œ148. See also  biochemistry and molecular biophysics AP/IB credit, 185  areas of research, 146Œ147  courses, 491Œ492, 515Œ532 double majors, 270 graduate programs, 383Œ385,  393Œ402 senior thesis, 269Œ270 undergraduate minor, 272Œ273  undergraduate option, 268Œ273 Chen Institute for Neuroscience at  Caltech, 12Chicago University Study Away  Program, 191Œ192 child abuse, 75, 81, 126Œ127Church Laboratory for Chemical Biology,  144, 148civil engineering, 148Œ149 areas of research, 148  computing facilities, 149 courses, 532Œ535 graduate program, 402Œ405  laboratories, 148Œ149classes. See coursesclassroom buildings. See also  laboratories; specific areas of study and  research  Annenberg Center for Information  Science, 166 biology, 144  Broad Center for the Biological  Sciences, 144 Cahill Center for Astronomy and  Astrophysics, 175  Linde Hall of Mathematics and  Physics, 168 Millikan Memorial Building, 14Clery reporting, sex- and gender-based  misconduct, 78clubs and associations. See student  activities845Coda (Caltech Collection of Open Digital  Archives), 14 Code of Conduct, 17, 44Œ46coffee shop, 24 college entrance examinations, 184,  187Œ188, 330Combined Array for Research in  Millimeter-wave Astronomy (CARMA),  140communications. See also emergency  notifications courses, 723Œ725 electronic information resources  policy, 46Œ49  science and engineering  communication (program of study), 175 complaints and complaint procedures  Problem-Resolution Process, 42  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 89Œ113computational mathematics. See  applied and computational mathematicscomputational science and engineering  graduate program, 408Œ409 computation and neural systems (CNS),  149Œ150 courses, 535Œ539 graduate program, 406Œ408  undergraduate option, 273Œ275 computer and computational science aerospace areas of research, 133  courses, 535Œ556 graduate programs, 406Œ413 computer science (CS), 150Œ152. See  also computation and neural systems;  computing and mathematical sciences areas of research, 150Œ152  computational science and  engineering graduate program, 408Œ409  courses, 539Œ554 double majors, 276 graduate programs, 408Œ411  laboratories, 152 undergraduate minor, 278Œ279  undergraduate option, 276Œ279 computing and mathematical sciences,  135Œ136, 152Œ153. See also applied and  computational mathematics; control and  dynamical systems courses, 554Œ556 graduate program, 411Œ413 conditional grade (E grade), 30Œ31Conduct Review Committee, 21confidential resources. See also privacy  harassment, 122Œ123conflicts of interest, 52Œ57, 340Œ343 consent, sex- and gender-based  misconduct policies, 79Œ81, 83Œ85consulting, conflicts of interest, 342Œ343 control and dynamical systems (CDS),  153 courses, 556Œ559 graduate program, 413Œ414  undergraduate minor, 279 Copenhagen Scholars Program,  192Œ193core curriculum requirements, 240Œ243 counseling services. See also advisors  and advising crisis services, 16, 26Œ27 mental health, 16, 26Œ27, 122Œ123courses, 456Œ737. See also specific  program  core curriculum requirements,  240Œ243 first-year courses, 243Œ245 humanities and social sciences  requirements, 241Œ242  introductory laboratory requirement,  241 menu classes, 240 physical education requirement,  242Œ243 scientific writing requirement, 243 COVID-19 pandemic accreditation during, 41  college entrance examinations and,  184 information on, 1 student wellness services, 24 vaccination policy, 25 CPET (Caltech Project for Effective  Teaching), 13 credits. See also registration  allowance and transfer of credit,  208Œ209 AP/IB course credits, 185Œ186  financial aid class level, 228Œ229 transfer admissions, 188Crellin Laboratory, 147 criminal activity. See also sex- and  gender-based misconduct policies;  violence and violence prevention  dating, relationship, or domestic  violence, 81Œ82 emergency contact notification  policy, 40Œ41  preservation of evidence, sexual  assault, 70 stalking, 82, 87Œ88, 127 Title IX, prohibited conduct under,  80Œ83crisis services, 16, 26Œ27cross-registration with other schools,  11Œ12CTLO (Center for Teaching, Learning, &  Outreach), 13 curriculum. See coursesDDabney House, 14, 16, 186Dabney Library for Humanities and  Social Sciences, 14Danish Technical University,  Copenhagen Scholars Program,  192Œ193dating violence, 81Œ82death, emergency contact notification  Index846policy, 41 Defense Department, US, 12deferral of entrance to undergraduate  program, 185 degrees offered, 10Œ12, 15. See also  specific program dependent care leaves of absence and  underloads, 336deposits, 209, 213detached duty, 342 dietary restrictions, 23 dining services, 23, 24, 209, 353Œ354direct loans, 217Œ222 disability and reasonable  accommodation policy, 57Œ59 Discobolus Trophy, 19 discrimination. See also  nondiscrimination and equal opportunity  policies; sex- and gender-based  misconduct policies definitions, 78Œ80 sexual discrimination, 85, 86dispute resolution  Federal Student Aid Ombudsman,  222 grades and grading, 21, 34 student problem resolution process,  42disruption of campus, emergency  contact notification policy, 40 distance learning, COVID-19 pandemic  and, 41diversity services Caltech Center for Inclusion &  Diversity, 22Œ23  CARE Team, 26Œ27 Doctor of Philosophy degrees, 15, 329,  347Œ351. See also specific program DocuServe, 14domestic violence, 81Œ82dormitories. See housingdouble majors applied and computational  mathematics, 247 astrophysics, 250  chemistry, 270  computer science, 276 electrical engineering, 283 geological and planetary sciences,  293Downs Laboratory of Physics, 175Drop Day, 32, 33 drop policies, 199, 212 drug abuse policies, 113Œ118dual degree programs  Caltech-Kaiser Permanente School  of Medicine MD/PhD Program, 392  3/2 Dual Degree Plan, 189Œ190 EE (conditional grade), 30Œ31early action application process, 183 École Polytechnique graduate exchange program, 368  Scholars Program, 193Œ194 economics courses, 512Œ515, 559Œ563 undergraduate option, 280Œ281 eDevice lending program, SFL, 14 Edinburgh Scholars Program, 194Œ195 educational loans, 217Œ222, 355education services Center for Teaching, Learning, &  Outreach, 13  Hixon Writing Center, 13Œ14 electrical engineering, 153Œ158 areas of research, 154Œ158  courses, 563Œ576 double majors, 283 graduate program, 415Œ417  laboratories, 154Œ158 undergraduate option, 282Œ287 electronic information resources policy,  46Œ49emergency leaves of absence, 202Œ203,  337emergency notifications  contact notification policy, 39Œ41  dangerous situations, 70 emergency student loans, 222 employment career development services, 27Œ29  conflicts of interest, 340Œ343  financial aid, 222Œ223 listings, 27Œ29 nondiscrimination and equal  opportunity policies, 63Œ67 on-campus employment, 29 recent graduates, employment  experience of, 29 special laboratory employment, 343 undergraduate/employee  relationships, 85  whistleblower policy, 128Œ129  work-study programs, 29, 222Œ223 Energy Department, US, 12 energy science and technology (EST),  160 courses, 577engineering. See also specific fields of  study and research  aerospace areas of research, 133  areas of research, 142Œ143  communication, science and  engineering (program of study), 175  courses, 492Œ499, 515Œ522,  532Œ535, 563Œ576, 577Œ579, 595Œ602,  678Œ690, 723Œ725 graduate programs, 385Œ387,  393Œ398, 402Œ405, 408Œ409, 415Œ420,  435Œ441 laboratories, 146, 147Œ148, 154Œ158 undergraduate options, 254Œ257,  265Œ268, 282Œ288, 290Œ293, 316Œ319Engineering and Applied Science (EAS)  Division. See scientific and engineering  communicationengineering and applied science (EAS)  847option, 287Œ289Engineer's Degree, 329  requirements, 345Œ347 English as a Second Language (ESL),  188Œ189, 330 courses, 594Œ595English (course of study), 164, 185 courses, 579Œ594 undergraduate minor, 290  undergraduate option, 288Œ290 English language proficiency, 188Œ189,  330Environment, Health, and Safety Office  (EHS), 60environment, health, and safety policies,  59Œ63Environment, Health and Safety  Committee (IEHSC), 60environmental science and engineering  (ESE), 158Œ162 areas of research, 159Œ160  courses, 595Œ602 graduate program, 418Œ420  laboratories, 160Œ162 undergraduate minor, 292Œ293  undergraduate option, 290Œ293 Equal Employment Opportunity  Coordinators  harassment policy, 123Œ124  nondiscrimination, 64Œ65equal opportunity policies employment, 63Œ67 transfer students, 189essays for admission application, 184ethical conduct, Code of Conduct, 17,  44Œ46evaluations for admission application, 184 written English, for transfer  application, 188events and event planning, 24, 44. See  also student activitiesevidence, sex- and gender-based  misconduct, 70exchange programs, 190  École Polytechnique graduate  exchange program, 368  graduate program, 331, 343  Scripps Institution of Oceanography,  12, 343Œ344expenses. See also financial aid graduate program, 351Œ354  undergraduate expenses, 209Œ214 exploitation, sexual, 84, 87export laws and regulations, policy  regarding, 49Œ51 Ffacilities. See buildings and facilitiesfaculty, 746Œ841  faculty and officers listing, 788Œ841  instruction and research staff by  division, 749Œ787 officers and committees, 746Œ748 faculty research, 12 faculty-student relations, 18 Fairchild Library of Engineering and  Applied Science, 14, 168false reports  sex- and gender-based misconduct,  75 violence reporting, 125 federal agencies. See also specific  agencies by name reporting, harassment, 121  reporting, sex- and gender-based  misconduct, 77Federal direct loans, 218Œ222 Federal financial aid direct loans, 218Œ222  FAFSA, 214  Ford Federal Direct Loan Program,  217Œ222 Pell Grants, 216 refunds and repayments, 211Œ212  Supplemental Educational  Opportunity Grant, 216 Work-Study program, 223 Federal Pell Grants, 216Federal Supplemental Educational  Opportunity Grant, 216Federal Work-Study (FWS) program, 223 fees and expenses, 209Œ214. See also  financial aidfellowships, graduate, 355F (failed) grades, 30, 33Œ34film courses, 730Œ736financial aid, 214Œ230 applying for, 215  assistantships, 354Œ355 Caltech loans, 222 class level, 228Œ229 deadlines, 215 direct loans, 217Œ222  disbursement of, 225Œ226 emergency loans, 222  emergency programs, 222  employment, 223 FAFSA, 214  Federal Pell Grants, 216 Federal Student Aid Ombudsman,  222 Federal Supplemental Educational  Opportunity Grant, 216 graduate program, 354Œ355  international applicants for, 215  loans, 217Œ222 Parent PLUS Loan, 220Œ222  part-time enrollment, 229Œ230  probation, 227Œ228  Satisfactory Academic Progress,  226Œ228 scholarships, 216 State grants, 216 studying abroad, 223Œ224  suspension, 228 time limits, 228Œ229 types available, 216Officers and Faculty 848 underload, 229Œ230 warnings, 227  work study programs, 223 firearms and weapons, 127 Firestone Flight Sciences Laboratory,  131first-year courses, 243Œ245Fleming House, 16, 186Ford Federal Direct Loan Program,  217Œ222foreign languages, 164  courses, 659Œ665 English language proficiency, 188,  330foreign study. See study abroad and  study away programs formal complaints, sex- and gender- based misconduct, 95Œ97founding, history, 9Œ10 Free Application for Federal Student Aid  (FAFSA), 214 freshman advisors, 18 freshman seminars, 602Œ605 GGALCIT (Graduate Aerospace  Laboratories), 131Œ135, 363, 364Gates Laboratory, 147 Gates-Thomas Laboratory of  Engineering, 148Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, 12 gender-based misconduct policies. See  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policiesgeneral deposit, 209, 213general information, 8Œ129geobiology. See also geological and  planetary sciences courses, 605Œ623 graduate program, 423Œ424  undergraduate option, 295Œ296 geochemistry. See also geological and  planetary sciences courses, 605Œ623 graduate program, 424  undergraduate option, 296Œ298 geological and planetary sciences  (GPS), 162Œ163 courses, 605Œ623 double majors, 293 graduate program, 420Œ426  library, 14  observatories, 163 physical facilities, 163 undergraduate minor, 300  undergraduate options, 293Œ300 geology. See also geological and  planetary sciences courses, 605Œ623 graduate program, 424Œ425  North Mudd Library for Geology, 14  undergraduate option, 294Œ295 geophysics. See also geological and  planetary sciences courses, 605Œ623 undergraduate option, 298Œ299 grade-point average (GPA). See grades  and gradinggrades and grading, 30Œ34 computing GPA, 32Œ33  dispute resolution, 21, 34  dropping courses, 32  GPA, 30Œ34, 204, 206, 207  incomplete grades, 31 withdrawal from course, 35 Graduate Aerospace Laboratories  (GALCIT), 131Œ135, 363, 364graduate and professional school  advising, 28Œ29graduate expenses, 351Œ354Graduate Honor Council (GHC), 21graduate program, 11, 328Œ454. See  also research; specific program  admissions, 329Œ330, 345, 346, 347 advising, 28Œ29, 338Œ339, 348, 349 assistantships, 354Œ355 candidacy, admission to, 346,  348Œ349 conflicts of interest, 340Œ343  detached duty, 342  Doctor of Philosophy degree, 329,  347Œ351 Engineer's degree, 329, 345Œ347  expenses, 351Œ354 final examinations, 347 financial assistance, 354Œ355 general administrative requirements,  332Œ333 housing, 353 humanities and social sciences,  177Œ180 joint B.S./M.S. degrees, 345  joint programs and partnerships,  11Œ12 leaves of absence, 333Œ338 Master of Science degree, 329, 345  minor programs of study, 347Œ348  part-time programs, 339  policies and procedures, 329Œ344  prizes, 356Œ362 refund and repayment policy, 355  registration, 331Œ333, 348  requirements, 344Œ351  residency, 344Œ345, 346, 348  residency requirements, 330, 331  responsible conduct of research,  340 satisfactory academic progress,  350Œ351 special laboratories, 343 special option regulations, 363Œ454  thesis, 347Œ350 Thesis Advisory Committee, 349 thesis examinations, 349 visiting student appointments,  330Œ331Graduate Student Council (GSC), 20, 42graduation requirements 849 core curriculum requirements,  240Œ243 time limits, 207 undergraduate, 239Œ327 guardian emergency contact notification  policy, 39Œ41 Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory,  131gymnasiums, 18Œ19HHacker Social Science Experimental  Laboratory (SSEL), 178, 180Hale, George Ellery, 9Œ10 Hale Telescope, 139 Hameetman Center, 17, 23, 24 harassment policies, 118Œ124. See also  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policiesHealth and Human Services  Department, US, 12health careers advising, 28Œ29 health center. See health services health forms, 25health insurance, 24Œ25health services, 24Œ25, 354. See also  mental health services emergency contact notification  policy, 39Œ40  environment, health, and safety  policies, 59Œ63 Student Health Portal, 25High Performance Computing (HPC)  clusters, 161Œ162, 170high school requirements for admission,  183history (course of study), 164 courses, 623Œ641, 730Œ736 graduate programs, 426  undergraduate minor, 302Œ303  undergraduate option, 300Œ303 history and philosophy of science (HPS),  164 courses, 633Œ641 graduate program, 426  undergraduate minor, 305Œ306  undergraduate option, 303Œ306 history of CalTech, 9Œ10  Archives and Special Collections, 15 Hixon Writing Center (HWC), 13Œ14 Honor Code, 20Œ21Honor System, 20Œ21 graduate expenses, 353 undergraduate expenses, 213 housing Catalina Graduate Apartment  Complex, 353 contracts, 209 graduate students, 353 Interhouse Committee, 19 Office of Residential Experience, 17  residency expectations, 186  undergraduate students, 16Œ17 humanities and social sciences, 164Œ165, 176Œ180. See also specific courses  of study allowance and transfer of credit,  208Œ209 areas of research, 165, 177Œ180  core curriculum requirements,  241Œ242 courses, 467Œ468, 579Œ594, 623Œ655, 697Œ700, 725Œ729, 730Œ736 drop policies, 199  graduate program, 451Œ454  libraries, 14, 164HWC (Hixon Writing Center), 13Œ14 II (incomplete) grades, 31IB (International Baccalaureate)  programs, 185Œ186 ID card charges, 214, 352 incomplete grades, 31information. See also academic records;  emergency notifications; privacy  electronic information resources  policy, 46Œ49  harrassment policy, 123  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 88information and data sciences (IDS),  165Œ166 advising, 309Œ310 courses, 655Œ658 double majors, 308 graduate program, 426Œ427  undergraduate minor, 310  undergraduate option, 306Œ310 information science and technology  (IST), 166 classroom buildings, 166  courses, 659 initiative, 152 laboratories, 166Information Science and Technology  (IST) Initiative, 152Infrared Processing and Analysis Center  (IPAC), 140 injuries. See health services; violenceInstitute Environment, Health and Safety  Committee (IEHSC), 60Institute for Quantum Information, 173instruction and research staff, 749Œ787 insurance, health insurance for students,  24Œ25intellectual property, Student Patent and  Computer Software Agreement, 42Œ44 intercollegiate teams (athletics), 705 interdisciplinary studies program (ISP),  166Œ167, 310Œ312, 659Interhouse Committee (IHC), 19interlibrary loan service, 14International Baccalaureate (IB)  programs, 185Œ186 International English Language Testing  System (IELTS), 330 International Student Programs (ISP), 29 Index850international students  financial aid, 215 geological and planetary sciences  graduate program, 421  graduate programs, 330  International Student Programs, 29 internships, 28 intramural athletics, 18Œ19introductory laboratory requirement, 241 inventions, Student Patent and  Computer Software Agreement, 42Œ44 investigations harassment complaints, 121 sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 101Œ113involuntary leaves of absence, 202Œ204,  336Œ338Jjet propulsion laboratories. See JPL  (Jet Propulsion Laboratory); Kármán  Laboratory of Fluid Mechanics and Jet  Propulsion joint programs, 11Œ12 JPL (Jet Propulsion Laboratory), 15, 163  astrophysics and, 140  environment, health, and safety  policies, 59Œ63 Environmental Affairs Program  Office, 61  Occupational Safety Program Office,  61 Office of Safety and Mission  Success, 61 physics and, 174 sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, reporting, 73  violence and violence prevention,  reporting, 125  visitors and contractors, 61, 62KKármán Laboratory of Fluid Mechanics  and Jet Propulsion, 131 Kavli Nanoscience Institute (KNI), 12Œ13,  138, 167, 170, 173Keck Array, 140, 163 Keck Engineering Laboratories, 148, 167Keck Observatory, 139Œ140, 175 Keck School of Medicine, USC, 12Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, 168, 175 Kerckhoff Laboratories of Biological  Sciences, 144Kerckhoff Marine Biological Laboratory,  144Llaboratories. See also specific programs  Alles Laboratory for Molecular  Biology, 144  Beckman Institute, 12, 144 Beckman Laboratory of Chemical  Synthesis, 147Œ148 Braun Laboratories, 144, 148 Bridge Laboratory of Physics, 175 Broad Center for the Biological  Sciences, 144, 148 Cann Laboratory, 134  Charyk Laboratory of Bioinspired  Design and Biopropulsion, 131  Church Laboratory for Chemical  Biology, 144, 148  Crellin Laboratory, 147  Downs Laboratory of Physics, 175 Firestone Flight Sciences  Laboratory, 131  GALCIT, 131Œ135, 363, 364  Gates Laboratory, 147  Gates-Thomas Laboratory of  Engineering, 148 Guggenheim Aeronautical  Laboratory, 131  Hacker Social Science Experimental  Laboratory, 178, 180  introductory laboratory requirement,  241 JPL. See JPL (Jet Propulsion  Laboratory) Kármán Laboratory of Fluid  Mechanics and Jet Propulsion, 131  Keck Engineering Laboratories, 148,  167 Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, 168,  175 Kerckhoff Laboratories of Biological  Sciences, 144 Kerckhoff Marine Biological  Laboratory, 144  Laboratory for Experimental  Economics and Political Science, 178,  180 Lauritsen Laboratory of High Energy  Physics, 175 Linde + Robinson Laboratory for  Global Environmental Science, 160Œ162  Mead Memorial Undergraduate  Chemistry Laboratory, 148  Moore Laboratory of Engineering,  154Œ158, 166 Noyes Laboratory of Chemical  Physics, 148 Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry  and Chemical Engineering, 146, 148 Seismological Laboratory, 163  Sloan Laboratory of Mathematics  and Physics, 175 Social and Information Science  Laboratory, 166  Social Science Experimental  Laboratory, 176  Spalding Laboratory of Engineering,  146 Steele Laboratory of Electrical  Sciences, 138, 167 Watson Laboratories of Applied  Physics, 138Laboratory for Experimental Economics  and Political Science (LEEPS), 178, 180language courses, 659Œ665. See also  English851 English as a Second Language, 330,  594Œ595Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave  Observatory (LIGO), 140, 175late payment fee, 213late registration fees, 213, 353 laundry, 17, 18 Lauritsen Laboratory of High Energy  Physics, 175law courses, 665law enforcement. See also criminal  activity reporting sex- and gender-based  misconduct, 74, 78leaves of absence conflicts of interest, 342  graduate students, 333Œ338, 342 undergraduate students, 200Œ204 Lee Center for Advanced Networking,  166legal notices and agreements, 34Œ44 libraries. See Caltech Library and  division librariesLIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational- Wave Observatory), 140, 175 Linde Hall of Mathematics and Physics,  168Linde + Robinson Laboratory for Global  Environmental Science, 160Œ162 Lloyd House, 16, 186loans, student, 217Œ222, 355London Scholars Program, 195Œ196 Lookout (Millikan Building), 14Mmail, student, 16majors (options), 10Œ11, 206Œ208. See  also specific option or program management courses, 512Œ515map of campus, 6Marks House, 17, 186Master of Science degrees, 329  educational philosophy, 15  requirements, 344Œ345 materials science, 167Œ168 areas of research, 167  courses, 665Œ669 graduate program, 427Œ432  laboratories, 167Œ168 undergraduate option, 312Œ314 mathematics, 168. See also applied and  computational mathematics; computing  and mathematical sciences AP/IB credit, 185Œ186  areas of research, 168  classroom buildings, 168  courses, 468Œ475, 554Œ556, 669Œ678 graduate programs, 369Œ371,  411Œ413, 432Œ435 undergraduate option, 315Œ316 Mead Memorial Undergraduate  Chemistry Laboratory, 148 mechanical engineering, 169Œ170 areas of research, 169  courses, 678Œ687 facilities, 170 graduate program, 435Œ439  undergraduate option, 316Œ319 medical emergencies, contact  notification policy, 39 medical engineering, 170Œ171 areas of research, 170Œ171  courses, 687Œ690 graduate program, 439Œ441 medical leaves of absence, 202Œ204,  334Œ335medical services. See health servicesmedicine. See also medical engineering Caltech-Kaiser Permanente School  of Medicine MD/PhD Program, 392  Caltech-UCLA Medical Scientist  Training Program (MSTP), 392  Caltech-USC MD/PhD Program, 392  premedical program, 258 Melbourne Scholars Program, 196Œ197 mental health services crisis services, 16, 26Œ27 harassment policy, 122Œ123  violence, victims of, 127Œ128mentorship, CAEL, 28menu classes, 240microbiology, 171Œ172 Millikan, Robert A., 10Millikan Memorial Building, 14minor programs of study. See also  specific programs  graduate program, 347Œ348 minors child abuse, 75, 81, 126Œ127 sex- and gender-based misconduct,  75, 81 students, emergency contact  notification policy, 39 missing persons, emergency contact  notification policy, 40 mission, 1, 9molecular biophysics. See biochemistry  and molecular biophysicsMoore Laboratory of Engineering,  154Œ158, 166music courses, 690Œ691music rehearsal facilities, 17 NNational Aeronautics Space  Administration (NASA), 12 reporting, sex- and gender-based  misconduct, 77National Institutes of Health, graduate  research and, 340 National Science Foundation (NSF) conflict of interest requirements, 55  graduate research and, 340  research funding, 12 neurobiology, 172  courses, 692Œ695 graduate program, 441Œ443  undergraduate minor, 319 neuroscience, 176 Index852 Chen Institute for Neuroscience at  Caltech, 12 graduate programs, 441Œ443,  449Œ451new student orientation, 186nonconsensual sexual contact, 67,  79Œ80nondiscrimination and equal opportunity  policies employment, 63Œ67 transfer students, 189North Mudd Library for Geology, 14 notices and agreements, legal, 34Œ44 notifications and warnings. See also  emergency notifications  emergency contact notification  policy, 39Œ41 Noyes, Arthur A., 10Noyes Laboratory of Chemical Physics,  148NSF. See National Science Foundation Oobservatories and observational  facilities, 139Œ140, 163. See also  telescopes Caltech Submillimeter Observatory,  140, 174, 175 Combined Array for Research in  Millimeter-wave Astronomy, 140  geological and planetary sciences,  163 Infrared Processing and Analysis  Center, 140  Keck Observatory, 139Œ140, 175  Laser Interferometer Gravitational- wave Observatory, 140, 175  Owens Valley Radio Observatory,  140, 163, 175 Palomar Observatory, 139, 163, 175  satellites, 139, 140 Spitzer Science Center, 140 Occidental College and Art Center  College of Design, 12off-campus facilities, 174, 175 Office of Research Compliance, 21 Office of Residential Experience (ORE),  17Œ18Office of Safety and Mission Success  (JPL OSMS), 61officers listings, 739  administrative officers, 744Œ746  faculty and officers, 788Œ841 official transcripts, 39 option advisors, 18options (majors), 10Œ11, 206Œ208. See  also specific option or program orientation, new student, 186Oschin Telescope, 139 outstanding bills graduate program, 352  registration and, 198, 213 overload of classes, 208Owens Valley Radio Observatory  (OVRO), 140, 163, 175PPage House, 16, 186Palomar Observatory, 139, 175 parent emergency contact notification  policy, 39Œ41 Parent PLUS Loan, 220Œ222 partnerships, academic, 11Œ12. See also  dual degree programs  Caltech-Kaiser Permanente School  of Medicine MD/PhD Program, 392  Caltech-UCLA Medical Scientist  Training Program (MSTP), 392  Caltech-USC MD/PhD Program, 392  Dual Degree Programs, 189Œ190 part-time enrollment and underloads,  208 dependent care, 336  financial aid, 229Œ230 graduate programs, 336, 339  refunds and repayments, 212 Pasadena, CA, 9pass/fail grading, 30, 33Œ34patents, Student Patent and Computer  Software Agreement, 42Œ44 Pearson Test of English Academic (PTE  Academic), 330Pell Grants, 216performing and visual arts, 21. See also  visual culture  courses, 695Œ697, 730Œ736 music rehearsal facilities, 17  rehearsal facilities, 17 persistence rates, student, 44personal leaves of absence, 200,  333Œ334P grades (pass/fail), 30, 33Œ34philosophy (course of study), 164. See  also history and philosophy of science courses, 697Œ700 undergraduate minor, 321  undergraduate option, 319Œ321 PHS (Public Health Service), conflict of  interest requirements, 55 physical education Athletics, Physical Education &  Recreation department, 18Œ19  core curriculum, 242Œ243  courses, 700Œ705 facilities, 18Œ19 gymnasiums, 18Œ19 intercollegiate teams, 705 physical plant. See buildings and  facilitiesphysics, 172Œ175. See also applied  physics; astrophysics; biochemistry and  molecular biophysics aerospace areas of research, 132  AP/IB credit, 186  areas of research, 137Œ138, 141,  172Œ175 courses, 477Œ490, 491Œ492, 706Œ716853 graduate programs, 375Œ379,  380Œ385, 443Œ448 laboratories, 175 undergraduate option, 322Œ324 plagiarism, 21, 71planetary science. See also geological  and planetary sciences graduate program, 425  undergraduate option, 299Œ300 policies, 46Œ129 ADA compliance, 57Œ59 conflicts of interest, 52Œ57  disability and reasonable  accommodation, 57Œ59 electronic information resources,  acceptable use of, 46Œ49 environment, health, and safety,  59Œ63 export laws and regulations, 49Œ51  harassment, 118Œ124 institutional conflicts of interest,  56Œ57 National Science Foundation conflict  of interest requirements, 55  nondiscrimination and equal  employment opportunity, 63Œ67  Public Health Service conflict of  interest requirements, 55  sexual misconduct, 67Œ113 Student Affairs, 129  substance abuse, 39Œ40, 113Œ118 unlawful harassment, 118Œ124 violence prevention, 124Œ128  whistleblower, 128Œ129 political science courses, 716Œ719 undergraduate option, 324Œ326 postdoctoral and senior postdoctoral  scholars, 12postgraduate school advising, 28Œ29pregnancy leaves of absence, 202, 335 pre-health careers advising, 28Œ29 premedical program, 258 printing service, 3-D, 14privacy access to academic records, 26,  36Œ39 confidential resources, 26, 122Œ123  harassment policy, 122  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 75Œ77, 103Œ104, 112prizes, 230Œ239, 356Œ362Problem-Resolution Process, 42 professional school advising, 28Œ29 psychology courses, 719Œ722public events, 24, 44Public Health Service (PHS), conflict of  interest requirements, 55 Qquantum science and engineering,  graduate programs, 447 Rrecords. See academic records recruiting program, on-campus, 27Œ28 Red Door Marketplace, 17, 24refunds and repayments, 210Œ214, 355 registration, 198Œ204  academic advisement, 199 adding courses, policies for, 199  allowance and transfer of credit,  208Œ209 changes, 199Œ200 cross-registration with other  schools, 11Œ12 drop policies, 199  eligibility, 198  graduate program, 331Œ333, 348  humanities drop policy, 199  involuntary leaves of absence,  202Œ204 late registration fees, 213  leaves of absence, 200Œ204 overloads and underloads, 208 procedures, 198  regulations, 198Œ204  summer research or summer  reading, 199Œ200  undergraduate leaves of absence,  200Œ204 withdrawal, 35, 204rehearsal (music) facilities, 17 relationship violence, 81Œ82 religious life on campus, 23 remedy-based resolution, sex- and  gender-based misconduct, 99Œ101 reporting  harassment, 120Œ121 sex- and gender-based misconduct,  70Œ78 violence and violence prevention,  125Œ126 whistleblower policy, 128Œ129 research  aerospace, 131Œ135  applied and computational  mathematics, 136 applied mechanics, 137 areas of, 130Œ181  assistantships, 355 astrophysics, 138Œ140  biochemistry and molecular  biophysics, 141 bioengineering, 142Œ143 biology, 143Œ144  centers and institutes, 12Œ13. See  also individual names chemical engineering, 144Œ146 chemistry, 146Œ147  computation and neural systems,  149Œ150 computer science, 150Œ152 education and, 10Œ15 electrical engineering, 154Œ158 environmental science and  engineering, 159Œ160 faculty research, 12 Index854 funds for graduate students, 355 graduate programs and research, 11  humanities, 165 materials science, 167 mathematics, 168 mechanical engineering, 169 medical engineering, 170Œ171 misconduct, 21, 48, 71 Office of Research Compliance, 21  physics, 172Œ175 responsible conduct of research,  340 senior thesis, 11 social and decision neuroscience,  176 social science, 177Œ180 staff of instruction and research,  749Œ787 summer research, 11  undergraduate research, 10Œ11  visiting student appointments, 331residence halls. See housing residency  graduate program, 330, 331, 344Œ 345, 346, 348 graduation requirement, 207  undergraduate expectations, 186 Residential Associates (RAs), 16, 353Residential Experience, Office of, 17Œ18 Residential Life Coordinators (RLCs),  16, 353Resnick Sustainability Institute, 13resolution, sex- and gender-based  misconduct complaints, 97Œ113retaliation  harassment policy, 121Œ122  sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 67, 69, 89Œ90retention rates, student, 44 Ricketts House, 16, 186Rosen Bioengineering Center, 13 ROTC program, 198Œ199 Ruddock House, 16, 186SSAC (Student Activities Center), 18safety policies, 59Œ63sanctions sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 104, 110Œ112 substance abuse policy, 116, 117Œ 118satellites, astronomical, 139, 140 Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP),  207 financial aid and, 226Œ228 graduate program, 350Œ351 Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry and  Chemical Engineering, 146, 148scholarships, 216 graduate, 355 part-time enrollment, 230 scholastic requirements, 205Œ209.  See also credits; grades and grading;  Satisfactory Academic Progress  allowance and transfer of credit,  208Œ209 candidacy for Bachelor's Degree,  207 change of option, 206Œ207 continuing in option, 206 departmental and option regulations,  206Œ208 eligibility for enrollment, 205  GPA, 206, 207  graduation requirement, 207  overloads and underloads, 208 selection of option, 206 term examinations, 207 time limits for graduation, 207 undergraduate program, 205Œ209 scientific and engineering  communication (SEC), 175 courses, 723Œ725scientific writing courses, 723Œ725 requirement, 243 Scripps Institution of Oceanography  (SIO), 12, 343Œ344Security services, sex- and gender- based misconduct reporting, 78 seismological facilities, 148, 163Seismological Laboratory, 163 senior thesis, 11sex- and gender-based misconduct  policies, 67Œ113 administrative resolution, 98Œ99, 101  appeal, 112Œ113 California Education Code (CEC),  83Œ84 children, reports involving, 75, 81  complaint procedures, 89Œ113  dating and domestic violence, 81Œ82 definitions, 78Œ84 disclosure of outcomes, 112  discrimination, 85, 86 emergency notifications, 70  employee/undergraduate  relationships, 85  evaluative responsibilities, 85  examples of prohibited conduct,  86Œ88 exploitation, sexual, 84, 87 formal complaints, 95Œ97 harassment, 82, 85, 87 investigation process, 101Œ113  minors, reports involving, 75, 81  options, complainants', 93Œ95 privacy, 75Œ77, 103Œ104, 112  prohibited conduct, 78Œ88  removal, emergency, 93  reporting, 70Œ78  resolution options, 97Œ113  retaliation, 67, 69, 89Œ90  sanctions and remedies, 104, 110Œ 112 stalking, 82, 87Œ88, 127 supportive measures, 92Œ93 855 timelines, 91, 105 Title IX, sexual misconduct covered  under, 80Œ83  undergraduate/employee  relationships, 85  warnings, timely, 70 sexual assault. See also sex- and  gender-based misconduct policies  preservation of evidence, sexual  assault, 70 sexual assault definitions, 80Œ81Sherman Fairchild Library (SFL), 14, 168 Sloan Laboratory of Mathematics and  Physics, 175Small Particle Hypervelocity Impact  Range, 135social and decision neuroscience, 176  graduate program, 449Œ451  research, 176 Social and Information Science  Laboratory, 166 Social Science Experimental Laboratory,  176social sciences. See humanities and  social sciencessocieties and clubs, 19Œ20, 22Œ24. See  also student activitiesSoftware Agreement, Student Patent  and Computer, 42Œ44 Southern California Earthquake Data  Center, 163 Southern California Seismic Network,  163South House laundry room, 18 space engineering graduate program,  364Œ366space studies. See aerospace Spalding Laboratory of Engineering, 146special fees, 213special meals, 23special students, visiting student  appointments, 330Œ331Spitzer Science Center (SSC), 140Spitzer Space Telescope Science  Center, 140 sports and athletic facilities, 18Œ19. See  also physical educationstaff listings  administrative officers, 744Œ746  faculty, 746Œ748  instruction and research, 749Œ787 Stafford federal Direct loans, 218Œ220 stalking, 82, 87Œ88, 127standardized testing. See testing state agencies, reporting to  harassment, 121 sex- and gender-based misconduct,  77Steele Laboratory of Electrical Sciences,  138, 167store, Student Auxiliary Services, Gift &  Technology Store, 24 structural mechanics undergraduate  minor, 326 structure of Caltech, 10 student activities, 18Œ24. See  also Hameetman Center; specific  organizations by name  ASCIT, 19Œ20, 42  athletics, 18Œ19 courses, 729Œ730 Graduate Honor Council, 21 Graduate Student Council, 20, 42 registration for, 24  sports, 18Œ19Student Activities Center (SAC), 18Student Affairs policies, 129 Student Auxiliary Services, Gift &  Technology Store, 24 student body publications, 21student center, 17, 23, 24 student government, 20 Student Health Portal, 25student housing. See housingstudent life, 16Œ24student loans, 217Œ222, 355Student Patent and Computer Software  Agreement, 42Œ44 student problem resolution process, 42 student retention and persistence rates,  44student services. See also advisors;  counseling services; dining services;  Hameetman Center; health services;  housing The Caltech Y, 23  career development services, 27Œ29  Center for Teaching, Learning, &  Outreach, 13  crisis services, 16, 26Œ27 event planning, 24, 44 faculty-student relations, 18  health and counseling services,  122Œ123, 354 Hixon Writing Center, 13Œ14  Interhouse Committee, 19 mail, 16 problem resolution process, 42  publications, 21 Student Activities Center, 18  Student Auxiliary Services, Gift &  Technology Store, 24  wellness services, 24Œ25student societies and clubs. See student  activitiesstudent wellness services, 24Œ25study abroad and study away programs,  12, 190Œ197, 223Œ224study spaces, 14. See also Caltech  Library and division librariesSubmillimeter Observatory (CSO), 140,  174, 175substance abuse policies, 113Œ118 emergency contact notification  policy, 39Œ40 summer term internships and jobs, 28  registration for summer research or  Index856summer reading, 199Œ200  SURF program, 11 Summer Undergraduate Research  Fellowships (SURF), 11Supplemental Educational Opportunity  Grant, 216sustainability, Resnick Sustainability  Institute, 13systems biology, 181 Tteaching assistantships, 354Œ355TechHub, 14 TechLab, 14 telescopes, 139Œ140. See also  observatories and observational facilities Atacama Large Millimeter/submm  Array (ALMA), 140 CARMA, 140 Hale Telescope, 139  Keck Array, 140, 163  Keck Observatory, 163  Linde + Robinson Laboratory for  Global Environmental Science, 161  Oschin Telescope, 139  Owens Valley Radio Observatory  (OVRO), 140, 163, 175 Palomar Observatory, 139  Spitzer Space Telescope Science  Center, 140  Thirty-Meter Telescope, 140, 163  Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF), 139 testing college entrance examinations, 184,  187Œ188, 330 Engineer's degree, 347  scholastic requirements, term  examinations, 207 standardized exams, 184, 187Œ188  Test of English as a Foreign  Language, 187Œ188, 330 transfer admissions, 187Œ188Test of English as a Foreign Language  (TOEFL), 187Œ188, 330textbooks, SFL Course Reserves, 14therapy services. See counseling  servicesthesis requirements. See also specific  graduate program  Doctor of Philosophy, 347Œ350  Engineer's Degree, 346  senior thesis, 11Thirty-Meter Telescope (TMT), 140, 163 threats, sex- and gender-based  misconduct policies, 863-D printing service, 143/2 Dual Degree Program, 189Œ190 Throop University, 9Œ10 time limits for graduation, 207Title IX and Title IX Coordinator, 70Œ78,  80Œ83. See also sex- and gender-based  misconduct policies definitions, prohibited conduct,  80Œ83 harrassment policy, 123Œ124  initial assessment, 91Œ92 nondiscrimination, 65 reporting to Title IX Coordinator,  71Œ73transcripts, 39. See also academic  records Transfer Admissions Entrance  Examinations, 188transfer of credit, scholastic  requirements, 208Œ209 transfer students admission process, 186Œ189  application for admission, 189 credit, allowance and transfer of,  208Œ209 graduation requirements, 188  nondiscrimination and equal  opportunity, 189  testing for admission, 187Œ188 3/2 Dual Degree Program, 189Œ190 trustees, 739Œ743tuition. See also financial aid graduate program, 351Œ354  undergraduate expenses, 209Œ214 UUASH. See Undergraduate Academic  Standards and Honors (UASH)  CommitteeUCLA Caltech-UCLA Medical Scientist  Training Program (MSTP), 392  Geffen School of Medicine, 12 Undergraduate Academic Standards  and Honors (UASH) Committee, 31Œ32 changes in registration, 199  enrollment eligibility, 205  veterans' registrations, 35 undergraduate expenses, 209Œ214. See  also financial aidUndergraduate Houses and housing,  16Œ17 residency expectations, 186 undergraduate program, 10Œ11,  182Œ327. See also registration; transfer  students admission, 183Œ190 core curriculum requirements,  240Œ243 emergency contact notification  policy, 40  expenses, 209Œ214 first-year courses, 243Œ245 graduation requirements, 239Œ327  joint B.S./M.S. degrees, 345  options, 182Œ327 senior thesis, 11undergraduate research, 10Œ11 underload of classes. See part-time  enrollment and underloads unexplained absences, emergency  contact notification policy, 40 United HealthCare Student Resources,  85725University of Chicago Study Away  Program, 191Œ192 University of Copenhagen Scholars  Program, 192Œ193 unpaid bills graduate program, 352  registration hold, 198, 213 USC Caltech-USC MD/PhD Program, 392  Keck School of Medicine, 12US Department of Defense, 12US Department of Energy, 12 US Department of Health and Human  Services, 12Vvaccination policy, COVID-19, 25 veterans' academic records, 34Œ35 violence and violence prevention  child abuse, 126Œ127 dating, relationship, or domestic  violence, 81Œ82 emergency contact notification  policy, 40  mental health services, 127Œ128 policies, 124Œ128 threats of, 86, 126 visual arts. See performing and visual  artsvisual culture  courses, 730Œ736 undergraduate minor, 326Œ327 voluntary leaves of absence, 200Œ202,  333Œ336WW (withdrawn) grades, 31warnings. See emergency notifications Watson Laboratories of Applied Physics,  138weapons and firearms, 127 wellness services, 24Œ25. See also  health serviceswhistleblower policy, 128Œ129 wind tunnels, 134Winnett Student Center. See  Hameetman Centerwithdrawal from course, 31, 35, 199  from Institute, 204  refund of tuition and expenses,  210Œ214 veterans, 35withdrawn grades, 31work-study listings, 29writing courses, 723Œ725, 736Œ737. See  also scientific writing Hixon Writing Center, 13Œ14  requirements, 243 YThe Y, 23 ZZwicky Transient Facility (ZTF), 139 Index